accessibility w3c w3c standards participate membership about w3c site navigation web design and applications html css javascript web apis graphics audio and video accessibility internationalization mobile web privacy math on the web skip w3c standards web design and applications accessibility accessibility on this page why what how wai learn more recent press releases current status of specifications and groups the power of the web is in its universality. access by everyone regardless of disability is an essential aspect. tim berners-lee w3c director and inventor of the world wide web the web is fundamentally designed to work for all people whatever their hardware software language culture location or physical or mental ability. when the web meets this goal it is accessible to people with a diverse range of hearing movement sight and cognitive ability. thus the impact of disability is radically changed on the web because the web removes barriers to communication and interaction that many people face in the physical world. however when websites web technologies or web tools are badly designed they can create barriers that exclude people from using the web. the mission of the web accessibility initiative wai is to lead the web to its full potential to be accessible enabling people with disabilities to participate equally on the web. see below for why the case for web accessibility what examples of web accessibility how make your website and web tools accessible web accessibility initiative wai at w3c learn more why the case for web accessibility it is essential that the web be accessible in order to provide equal access and equal opportunity to people with diverse abilities. indeed the un convention on the rights of persons with disabilities recognizes access to information and communications technologies including the web as a basic human right. accessibility supports social inclusion for people with disabilities as well as others such as older people people in rural areas and people in developing countries. there is also a strong business case for accessibility. accessibility overlaps with other best practices such as mobile web design device independence multi-modal interaction usability design for older users and search engine optimization seo case studies show that accessible websites have better search results reduced maintenance costs and increased audience reach among other benefits. developing a web accessibility business case for your organization details the social technical financial and legal benefits of web accessibility. what examples of web accessibility properly designed websites and web tools can be used by people with disabilities. however currently many sites and tools are developed with accessibility barriers that make it difficult or impossible for some people to use them. below are just a few examples. alternative text for images alt text is the classic example. images should include equivalent alternative text in the markup code. if alt text isn t provided for images the image information is inaccessible for example to people who cannot see and use a screen reader that reads aloud the information on a page including the alt text for the visual image. when equivalent alt text is provided the information is available to everyone to people who are blind as well as to people who turned off images on their mobile phone to lower bandwidth charges people in a rural area with low bandwidth who turned off images to speed download and others. it s also available to technologies that cannot see the image such as search engines. keyboard input some people cannot use a mouse including many older users with limited fine motor control. an accessible website does not rely on the mouse it provides all functionality via a keyboard. then people with disabilities can use assistive technologies that mimic the keyboard such as speech input. transcripts for podcasts just as images aren t available to people who can t see audio files aren t available to people who can t hear. providing a text transcript makes the audio information accessible to people who are deaf or hard of hearing as well as to search engines and other technologies that can t hear. it s easy and relatively inexpensive for website developers to provide transcripts for podcasts and audio files. there are also transcription services that create text transcripts in html format. how make your website and web tools accessible most of the basics of accessibility are even easier and less expensive than providing transcripts. however the proper techniques are poorly integrated into some web tools education and development processes. if you are new to accessibility it takes some time and effort to learn the common issues and solutions. a starting place is the introduction to web accessibility. some accessibility barriers are more complicated to avoid and the solutions take more development time and effort. w3c wai provides extensive resources to help such as understanding wcag 2.0 a guide to understanding and implementing web content accessibility guidelines 2.0. using authoring tools that support accessibility makes it easier for website developers. browsers also play a role in accessibility. essential components of web accessibility explains the relationships between the different components of web development and interaction. accessibility is essential for developers and organizations that want to create high quality websites and web tools and not exclude people from using their products and services. web accessibility initiative wai at w3c the w3c web accessibility initiative wai brings together people from industry disability organizations government and research labs from around the world to develop guidelines and resources to help make the web accessible to people with disabilities including auditory cognitive neurological physical speech and visual disabilities. wai s coverage of web accessibility includes web content websites and web applications authoring tools such as content management systems cms and blog software browsers and other user agents and w3c technical specifications including wai-aria for accessible rich internet applications. we invite individuals and organizations to participate in wai by volunteering to implement promote and review guidelines contributing to the wai interest group and participating in working groups. learn more wai provides a wide range of resources on different aspects of web accessibility standards education implementation and policy including introduction to web accessibility essential components of web accessibility how people with disabilities use the web improving the accessibility of your web site managing accessibility evaluating web accessibility standards guidelines and techniques for making accessible websites web content accessibility guidelines wcag authoring tools authoring tool accessibility guidelines atag browsers user agent accessibility guidelines uaag web applications accessible rich internet applications wai-aria developing a web accessibility business case for your organization wai home page highlights and more wai resources recent w3c press releases and member testimonials w3c s accessible rich internet applications wai-aria 1.0 expands accessibility of the open web platform 20 march 2014 recent press 18 june knight blog the world wide web consortium at 20 moving the web toward its full potential 31 march it world accessible technology professionals will soon be able to get certified 26 march digital journal the apache software foundation celebrates document freedom day 2014 24 march it world the w3c makes accessible rich internet applications a web standard current status of specifications learn more about the current status of specifications related to accessibility all web content accessibility guidelines wcag accessible rich internet applications wai-aria user agent accessibility guidelines uaag authoring tool accessibility guidelines atag evaluation and report language earl indieui these w3c groups are working on the related specifications authoring tool accessibility guidelines working group education and outreach working group evaluation and repair tools working group protocols and formats working group user agent accessibility guidelines working group web content accessibility guidelines working group html working group independent user interface indie ui working group research and development working group current status accessibility all web content accessibility guidelines wcag accessible rich internet applications wai-aria user agent accessibility guidelines uaag authoring tool accessibility guidelines atag evaluation and report language earl indieui use it how people with disabilities use the web improving the accessibility of your web site managing accessibility evaluating web accessibility more resources logos wcag 2 acknowledgements editors shawn lawton henry and liam mcgee. contributors shadi abou-zahra andrew arch alan chuter sylvie duchateau jack welsh william loughborough catherine roy sharron rush yeliz yesilada and other participants of the education and outreach working group eowg footer navigation navigation home standards participate membership about w3c contact w3c contact help and faq sponsor donate site map feedback w3c updates copyright 2013 w3c mit ercim keio beihang usage policies apply. 