audio and video w3c w3c standards participate membership about w3c site navigation web design and applications html css javascript web apis graphics audio and video accessibility internationalization mobile web privacy math on the web skip w3c standards web design and applications audio and video audio and video on this page what is topic what is topic used for examples learn more current status of specifications and groups the web is about more than text and information it is also a medium for expressing artistic creativity data visualization and optimizing the presentation of information for different audiences with different needs and expectations. like graphics the use of video and audio on web sites enhances the experience for users and w3c has several different and complementary technologies that work together with html svg and scripting to provide the creators of web pages and web applications with the tools they need to deliver the best possible representation of their content. what are audio and video the terms audio and video commonly refers to the time-based media storage format for sound music and moving pictures information. audio and video digital recording also referred as audio and video codecs can be uncompressed lossless compressed or lossy compressed depending on the desired quality and use cases. audio codecs can usually contain one audio channel mono two audio channels stereo or more channels e.g. 5.1 surround for example human voice is recorded using one channel while music uses in general two or more channels. the quality will vary depending on the bitrate ie the number of bits used per unit of playback time. video codecs will contain a sequence of frames ie still pictures and for compressed formats movements between those pictures. quality will vary depending on the number of frames per second color space resolution etc. media storage formats will contain audio codec streams video codec streams captions and meta information. it combine them to provide the audio or the video with alternative or enhanced materials. in general a video will have one video codec stream one or more alternative audio codec streams and may have captions and meta information. what is audio and video used for audio and video are used for enhancing the experience with web pages e.g. audio background to serving music family videos presentations etc. the web content accessibility guidelines recommend to always provide alternatives for time-based media such as captions descriptions or sign language. what is smil smil is the synchronized multimedia integration language an xml-based language for describing interactive multimedia presentations. it combines audio video hypertext images in time and space allowing visual transitions in between. what is timed text timed text is an xml-based language to timed text media for the purpose of interchange among authoring systems. it may also be used directly as a distribution format thus suitable for captioning or video description. what are media fragments media fragments provide for a media-format independent standard means of addressing media fragments in time and space on the web using identifiers url uri iri what are media annotations media annotations provide ways to describe media resources using a common set of properties. those annotations help convey information that can then be reused in search engines or tagging systems. examples here are some examples of smil svg and html respectively with video content smil xmlns http www.w3.org ns smil body par video src http www.example.org myvideo fill freeze text src http www.example.org mycaption fill freeze par body smil svg xmlns http www.w3.org 2000 svg xmlns xlink http www.w3.org 1999 xlink g video xlink href http www.example.org myvideo x 0 y 0 width 360 height 240 g svg doctype html html head title my video title head body video src http www.example.org myvideo width 360 height 240 body html learn more explanation... recent press 7 june the economist technology quarterly q2 2014 you re in my browser 2 june zdnet.fr webrtc pour firefox skype a du souci se faire 2 june light reading what webrtc means for telcos 29 may the register hello hello yes i m calling you on my web browser current status of specifications learn more about the current status of specifications related to smil media access timed text svg html web real time communication audio web and tv these w3c groups are working on the related specifications audio working group cascading style sheets css working group device apis working group forms working group html working group internationalization working group protocols and formats working group rdfa working group svg working group technical architecture group timed text working group web applications working group web real-time communications working group web and tv interest group xslt working group current status smil media access timed text svg html web real time communication audio web and tv use it tutorials business case software validators markup footer navigation navigation home standards participate membership about w3c contact w3c contact help and faq sponsor donate site map feedback w3c updates copyright 2013 w3c mit ercim keio beihang usage policies apply. 