browsers and media players- w3c w3c standards participate membership about w3c site navigation browsers and authoring tools authoring tools browsers skip w3c standards browsers and authoring tools browsers and media players browsers media players on this page examples of user agent standards issues accessibility guidelines for user agents current status of specifications and groups user agents web browsers media players browser extensions on-the-fly converters plug-ins bots aggregators and mobile browsers provide a human or machine interface to the web. at their best they allow all of us to explore a universal space of web content. examples of user agent standards issues user agent developers need to pay particular heed to issues surrounding use of their agents by people in other parts of the world speaking other languages using other devices and with a variety of assistive technologies that allow users to use different modes of input and output such as speech input tactile displays semantic navigation and a variety of display preferences example 1 an online app developer wants to provide context-sensitive help in a tooltip that is displayed when the user with a mouse hovers over or with a keyboard focuses a help icon. in most browsers the functionality automatically works for hover the title element is displayed. however most browsers don t provide the same functionality for keyboard users on focus. to compensate for the missing functionality in the browsers the developer has to create scripts to provide it for her content. unfortunately most developers don t do this and indeed they shouldn t have to because the browser should provide the same functionality for people who cannot use the mouse. example 2 a developer uses the css declaration text-transform lowercase to style a magazine headline about fresh orange juice originally composed in caps. the content is then internationalised for a turkish-language audience and a language of turkish declared using the attribute lang tr the lower case of the turkish character a capital i dotted should return a i. major browsers however convert the turkish character i to i. an innocuous headline squeeze often suddenly becomes rather rude... w3c staff documented some common user agent problems in a team submission still a useful document although it was published in 2003. accessibility guidelines for user agents w3c publishes guidelines for creating accessible authoring tools user agent accessibility guidelines uaag uaag 2.0 is intended for the current and future generation of user agents. you can implement the latest draft of the user agent accessibility guidelines uaag 2.0 by following implementing uaag 2.0 a guide to implementing and understanding the guidelines. you may also wish to consult the current formally approved stable and referenceable technical recommendation for accessibility is uaag 1.0. browser developers need some help at making the web readable by all extension developers can respond to limitations of particular browser functionality and the best extensions can be incorporated into the browsers standard functionality. whether you develop browsers extensions bots aggregators media players or an as-yet undreamed of way of reading the web to create that web that is readable by all the user agent accessibility guidelines provide the place to start. current status of specifications learn more about the current status of specifications related to security for user agents dom html html for user agents user agent accessibility guidelines uaag plugins web idl these w3c groups are working on the related specifications cascading style sheets css working group device apis working group forms working group html working group internationalization working group protocols and formats working group rdfa working group svg working group technical architecture group user agent accessibility guidelines working group web applications working group current status security for user agents dom html html for user agents user agent accessibility guidelines uaag plugins web idl validators markup acknowledgments editor of introductory text liam mcgee. contributors shawn lawton henry and participants of the education and outreach working group eowg footer navigation navigation home standards participate membership about w3c contact w3c contact help and faq sponsor donate site map feedback w3c updates copyright 2013 w3c mit ercim keio beihang usage policies apply. 