composite capabilities preference profiles terminology and abbreviations composite capabilities preference profiles terminology and abbreviations w3c working draft 21 july 2000 this version http www.w3.org tr 2000 wd-ccpp-ta-20000721 latest version http www.w3.org tr ccpp-ta editors mikael nilsson mikael.nilsson@ks.ericsson.se ericsson copyright 2000 w3c mit inria keio all rights reserved. w3c liability trademark document use and software licensing rules apply. abstract this document contains terminology and abbreviations that are used in other cc pp documents. for a detailed description of cc pp please see cc pp status of this document this document is a working draft made available by the world wide web consortium w3c for discussion only. this indicates no endorsement of its content. this is the first public working draft and work in progress representing the current consensus of the working group and future updates and changes are likely. the working group is part of the w3c mobile access activity. continued status of the work is reported on the cc pp working group home page member-only link it incorporates suggestions resulting from reviews and active participation by members of the ietf conneg working group and the wap forum uaprof drafting committee. please send comments and feedback to www-mobile@w3.org. a list of current w3c recommendations and other technical documents can be found at http www.w3.org tr table of contents 1. terminology 2. abbreviations 3. references 1. terminology the key words must must not should should not may and may not in this document are to be interpreted as described in rfc 2119 rfc2119 the following terms are used in this document. anonymization hiding the identity of the user as a security precaution. assurance of origin information provided to the receiver of a message that allows it to be certain of the origin of the message. this assurance may not be sufficient to convince any other party about the origin of the message. assurance of receipt information provided to the sender of a message that allows it to be certain that the message was delivered to its intended recipient. this is not necessarily a proof of receipt. attributes a cc pp attribute refers to the data elements describing the profile and is denoted as an rdf property. each cc pp attribute is associated with a value or a list of values or resources. authentication some communication process that provides definite and tamper-proof information about the identity of a communicating party. authorization permission to view or modify a data resource or to perform some other action. authorization is usually granted to an identified entity and thus depends on authentication of the party performing the action. cc pp repository a server that stores the user agent profile or profile segments persistently in a form that may be referenced by and incorporated into a profile. a cc pp repository is typically a web server that provides cc pp profiles or profile segments in response to http requests. cacheable a data resource is said to be cacheable if the data resource contains a property that allows a sever to determine whether the cached resource matches a request for a similar resource. cache a storage area used by a server or proxy to store data resources that have been retrieved or created in response to a request. when a new request for a cached data resource is received the server or proxy can respond with the cached version instead of retrieving or creating a new copy. capability an attribute of a sender or receiver often the receiver which indicates an ability to generate or process a particular type of message content. see also attributes channel security a form of security authentication and or confidentiality that operates on a given communication channel regardless of the information that is transferred over that channel. the security thus provided is between the end-points of the channel only. client an entity that is the original compositor of a cc pp profile. confidentiality protecting the content of a message from unauthorized disclosure. content generation for the purpose of this specification content generation refers to generating content appropriate to the user agent profile of the request by using the user agent profile as input to a dynamic content generation engine. the xsl and style sheets of the document are used to tailor the document to the user agent profile of the request. content negotiation the mechanism for selecting the appropriate representation when servicing a request. the representation of entities in any response can be negotiated including error responses content selection for the purpose of this specification content selection refers to selecting an appropriate document from a list of possible choices or variants by matching the document profile with the user agent profile of the request. content provider a server that originates content in response to a request. data resource a data object that can be transferred across a network. data resources may be available in multiple representations e.g. multiple languages data formats size resolutions or vary in other ways. document for the purpose of this specification document refers to content supplied in response to a request. using this definition a document may be a collection of smaller documents which in turn is a part of a greater document document profile document profiles offer a means to characterize the features appropriate to given categories of user agents. for instance one profile might include support for style sheets vector graphics and scripting while another might be restricted to the tags in html 3.2. document profiles can be used by servers to select between document variants developed for different user agent categories. they can be used to determine what transformations to apply when such variants are not available. content developers can use document profiles to ensure that their web sites will be rendered as intended. dynamic content content that is generated in response to a request. this may be used for content that depends on changing environmental factors such as time e.g. stock quotes or place e.g. nearby gas stations feature functional property of a device or entity. gateway software that is capable of bridging disparate network protocols. for the purposes of this specification gateway refers to protocol bridging functionality which may exist in a stand-alone gateway or may be co-located with a proxy or origin server. hint a suggestion or preference for a particular option. while this option is strongly recommended its use is not required. integrity procedures applied to ensure that information is not corrupted in transit. different integrity procedures may protect against accidental or intentional corruption of data. machine understandable data that is described with tags that associate a meaning to the data i.e. an author tag would describe the author of the document allowing data to be searched or combined and not just displayed. namespace a qualifier added to an xml tag to ensure uniqueness among xml elements. negotiate content message content that has been selected by content negotiation. negotiation metadata information which is exchanged between the sender and the receiver of a message by content negotiation in order to determine the variant which should be transferred. non-repudiation this term has been the subject of much dispute. broadly speaking it is a process that prevents a party to a communication from subsequently denying that the communication took place or from denying the content of the communication. sometimes this term is used in a purely technical sense e.g. generation of data that is dependent on the communication and its content and sometimes in a legal sense i.e. evidence that could be sustained in a court of law non-repudiation of origin the ability of the receiver to verify the source of the information. non-repudiation of receipt the ability of the sender to verify that the intended recipient received the information. non-variant content when the form format of the content being sent does not depend on receiver s capabilities and or preferences object security a form of security authentication and or confidentiality that operates on an item of data a object regardless of the communication channel over which it is passed. object security can apply to data that is passed over several different data channels in succession but cannot be used to protect message addressing and other transfer-related information. origin server software that can respond to requests by delivering appropriate content or error messages. the origin server may receive requests via either wsp or http. application programs executing on the origin server deliver content that is tailored in accordance with the cc pp that can be found within the provided profile. for the purpose of this specification origin server refers to content generation capabilities which may physically exist in a stand-alone web server or may be co-located with a proxy or gateway. preference an attribute of a sender or receiver often the receiver which indicates a preference to generate or process one particular type of message content over another even if both are possible. privacy preventing the unintended or unauthorized disclosure of information about a person. such information may be contained within a message but may also be inferred from patterns of communication e.g. when communications happen the types of resource accessed the parties withwhom communication occurs etc. profile an instance of the schema that describe capabilities for a specific device and network. a profile need not have all the attributes identified in the vocabulary schema. proof of receipt or proof of delivery information provided to the sender of a message that allows them to prove subsequently to a third party that the message was delivered to its intended recipient. this proof may not necessarily be legally sustainable. proxy software that receives http requests and forwards that request toward the origin server possibly by way of an upstream proxy using http. the proxy receives the response from the origin server and forwards it to the requesting client. in providing its forwarding functions the proxy may modify either the request or response or provide other value-added functions. for the purposes of this specification proxy refers to request response forwarding functionality which may exist in a stand-alone http proxy or may be co-located with a gateway or origin server. rdf resource an object or element being described by rdf expressions is a resource. an rdf resource is identified by a uri. receiver a system component device or program which receives a message. receiver-initiated transmission a message transmission which is requested by the eventual receiver of the message. sometimes described as pull messaging. e.g. an http get operation. schema an rdf schema denotes resources which constitute the particular unchanging versions of an rdf vocabulary at any point in time. it is used to provide semantic information such as organization and relationship about the interpretation of the statements in an rdf data model. it does not include the values associated with the attributes. security describes a set of procedures applied to data communications to ensure that information is transferred exactly as the sender and receiver intend and in no other way. security generally breaks down into integrity authentication confidentiality and privacy. sender a system component device or program which transmits a message. sender-initiated transmission a message transmission which is invoked by the sender of the message. sometimes described as push messaging. e.g. sending an email. user an individual or group of individuals acting as a single entity. the user is further qualified as an entity who uses a device to request content and or resource from a server. user agent a program such as a browser running on the device that acts on a user s behalf. users may use different user agents at different times. user agent profile capabilities and preference information pertaining to the capabilities of the device the operating and network environment and users personal preferences for receiving content and or resource. variant one of several possible representations of a data resource. variant content when the form format of the content being sent depends on receiver s capabilities and or preferences vocabulary a collection of attributes that adequately describe the cc pp. a vocabulary is associated with a schema. 2. abbreviations cc pp composite capabilities preferences profile cc ppex cc pp exchange protocol conneg content negotiation working group in the ietf er entity-relationship html hyper text markup language http hyper text transfer protocol httpex http extension framework iana internet assigned numbers authority ietf internet engineering task force iotp internet open trading protocol ldap lightweight directory access protocol ota over the air i.e. in the radio network p3p project for platform for privacy preferences rdf resource description framework rfc request for comments tbd to be determined tcp ip transmission control protocol internet protocol uaprof user agent profile w3c world wide web consortium wap wireless application protocol wbxml wap binary xml wml wireless markup language wsp wireless session protocol xhtml extensible hyper-text markup language xsl extensible style language xml extensible markup language 3 references cc pp composite capability preference profiles cc pp a user side framework for content negotiation rdf resource description framework rdf model and syntax specification rfc2119 rfc 2119 key words for use in rfcs to indicate requirement levels xml extensible markup language xml 1.0 