data w3c w3c standards participate membership about w3c site navigation semantic web vertical applications inference query ontologies data skip w3c standards semantic web data linked data on this page what is linked data what is linked data used for examples learn more current status of specifications and groups what is linked data the semantic web is a web of data of dates and titles and part numbers and chemical properties and any other data one might conceive of. the collection of semantic web technologies rdf owl skos sparql etc. provides an environment where application can query that data draw inferences using vocabularies etc. however to make the web of data a reality it is important to have the huge amount of data on the web available in a standard format reachable and manageable by semantic web tools. furthermore not only does the semantic web need access to data but relationships among data should be made available too to create a web of data as opposed to a sheer collection of datasets this collection of interrelated datasets on the web can also be referred to as linked data. to achieve and create linked data technologies should be available for a common format rdf to make either conversion or on-the-fly access to existing databases relational xml html etc it is also important to be able to setup query endpoints to access that data more conveniently. w3c provides a palette of technologies rdf grddl powder rdfa the upcoming r2rml rif sparql to get access to the data. what is linked data used for linked data lies at the heart of what semantic web is all about large scale integration of and reasoning on data on the web. almost all applications listed in say collection of semantic web case studies and use cases are essentially based on the accessibility of and integration of linked data at various level of complexities. examples a typical case of a large linked dataset is dbpedia which essentially makes the content of wikipedia available in rdf. the importance of dbpedia is not only that it includes wikipedia data but also that it incorporates links to other datasets on the web e.g. to geonames. by providing those extra links in terms of rdf triples applications may exploit the extra and possibly more precise knowledge from other datasets when developing an application by virtue of integrating facts from several datasets the application may provide a much better user experience. learn more tim berners-lee s note on linked data gives a succinct description of the linked data principles. the semantic web community also maintains a list of books on a w3c wiki page. some of those books are introductory in nature while others are conference proceedings or textbook that address more advanced topics. details of recent and upcoming semantic web related talks given by the w3c staff the staff of the w3c offices and members of the w3c working groups are available separately the slides are usually publicly available. the w3c also maintains a collection of semantic web case studies and use cases that show how semantic web technologies including linked data are used in practice. recent press 18 june semantic web journal the semantic web journal celebrates the 25th anniversary of the web 13 june laboratory equipment tech lets you track your data online 26 march digital journal the apache software foundation celebrates document freedom day 2014 20 march businesswire pharmaceutical and it communities collaborate on oasis clinical trial data standard for content management systems current status of specifications learn more about the current status of specifications related to rdf rdf best practices rdfa rdf relationship to other formats grddl powder semantic annotation for wsdl and xml schema provenance rdb2rdf linked data these w3c groups are working on the related specifications government linked data working group linked data platform ldp working group rdf working group rdfa working group semantic web interest group current status rdf rdf best practices rdfa rdf relationship to other formats grddl powder semantic annotation for wsdl and xml schema provenance rdb2rdf linked data use it tutorials business case software validators rdf logos rdf footer navigation navigation home standards participate membership about w3c contact w3c contact help and faq sponsor donate site map feedback w3c updates copyright 2013 w3c mit ercim keio beihang usage policies apply. 