graphics w3c w3c standards participate membership about w3c site navigation web design and applications html css javascript web apis graphics audio and video accessibility internationalization mobile web privacy math on the web skip w3c standards web design and applications graphics graphics on this page what are graphics what are graphics used for examples learn more current status of specifications and groups the web is about more than text and information it is also a medium for expressing artistic creativity data visualization and optimizing the presentation of information for different audiences with different needs and expectations. the use of graphics on web sites enhances the experience for users and w3c has several different and complementary technologies that work together with html and scripting to provide the creators of web pages and web applications with the tools they need to deliver the best possible representation of their content. learn more below about this intro text is boilerplate for the beta release of w3.org. our intent is to invite the community to develop this template and help provide useful content and links. for a more complete example see the page for html css. what are graphics web graphics are visual representations used on a web site to enhance or enable the representation of an idea or feeling in order to reach the web site user. graphics may entertain educate or emotionally impact the user and are crucial to strength of branding clarity of illustration and ease of use for interfaces. examples of graphics include maps photographs designs and patterns family trees diagrams architectural or engineering blueprints bar charts and pie charts typography schematics line art flowcharts and many other image forms. graphic designers have many tools and technologies at their disposal for everything from print to web development and w3c provides many of the underlying formats that can be used for the creation of content on the open web platform. what are graphics used for graphics are used for everything from enhancing the appearance of web pages to serving as the presentation and user interaction layer for full-fledged web applications. different use cases for graphics demand different solutions thus there are several different technologies available. photographs are best represented with png while interactive line art data visualization and even user interfaces need the power of svg and the canvas api. css exists to enhance other formats like html or svg. webcgm meets the needs for technical illustration and documentation in many industries. what is png portable network graphics png is a static file format for the lossless portable well-compressed storage and exchange of raster images bitmaps it features rich color control with indexed-color grayscale and truecolor support and alpha-channel transparency. png is designed for the web with streaming and progressive rendering capabilities. it is supported ubiquitously in web browsers graphical authoring tools image toolkits and other parts of the creative tool chain. png files have the file extension png or png and should be deployed using the media type image png png images may be used with html css svg the canvas api and webcgm. what is svg scalable vector graphics svg is like html for graphics. it is a markup language for describing all aspects of an image or web application from the geometry of shapes to the styling of text and shapes to animation to multimedia presentations including video and audio. it is fully interactive and includes a scriptable dom as well as declarative animation via the smil specification it supports a wide range of visual features such as gradients opacity filters clipping and masking. the use of svg allows fully scalable smooth reusable graphics from simple graphics to enhance html pages to fully interactive chart and data visualization to games to standalone high-quality static images. svg is natively supported by most modern browsers with plugins to allow its use on all browsers and is widely available on mobile devices and set-top boxes. all major vector graphics drawing tools import and export svg and they can also be generated through client-side or server-side scripting languages. what is css cascading style sheets css is the language for describing the presentation of web pages including colors layout and font information. it may be used to enhance the graphical aspects of html and svg. you can read more on the page for html css. what is the canvas api the canvas api is a client-side scripting technology to allow for the rich creation or alteration of raster images bitmaps it uses vector-based programmatic methods to create shapes gradients and other graphical effects and because it has no dom it can perform very quickly. dedicated scripters can develop games or even full-featured applications using the canvas api alone or integrated into html or svg. it is supported natively in most modern browsers with script libraries extending support to all major browsers and even on some mobile devices. what is webcgm web computer graphics metafile webcgm is the web profile of cgm the iso standard for vector and composite vector raster picture definition. cgm has a significant following in technical illustration interactive electronic documentation geophysical data visualization amongst other application areas and is widely used in the fields of automotive engineering aeronautics and the defense industry. webcgm has many of the same graphical features as svg. examples as a simple example of an svg image file here is a circle with a gradient to give it a 3d appearance svg xmlns http www.w3.org 2000 svg width 100 height 100 viewbox 0 0 100 100 defs radialgradient id rg cx 100 cy 100 fx 80 fy 80 gradientunits userspaceonuse stop offset 5 stop-color lightskyblue stop offset 100 stop-color darkblue radialgradient defs circle id circle_1 cx 100 cy 100 r 95 fill url rg svg learn more for more information about using open web graphics see w3c s graphics tutorials. recent press 26 march digital journal the apache software foundation celebrates document freedom day 2014 24 march infoworld half full or half empty html5 s mixed outlook current status of specifications learn more about the current status of specifications related to svg png webcgm graphics these w3c groups are working on the related specifications svg working group cascading style sheets css working group internationalization working group xslt working group current status svg png webcgm graphics use it tutorials business case software logos svg footer navigation navigation home standards participate membership about w3c contact w3c contact help and faq donate site map feedback w3c updates copyright 2013 w3c mit ercim keio beihang usage policies apply. 