html templates html templates w3c working group note 18 march 2014 this version http www.w3.org tr 2014 note-html-templates-20140318 latest version http www.w3.org tr html-templates latest editor s draft https dvcs.w3.org hg webcomponents raw-file tip spec templates index.html previous version http www.w3.org tr 2013 wd-html-templates-20130214 revision history https dvcs.w3.org hg webcomponents log tip spec templates index.html participate discuss on public-webapps@w3.org web applications working group file bugs w3.org s bugzilla editors dimitri glazkov google dglazkov@chromium.org rafael weinstein google rafaelw@chromium.org tony ross microsoft tross@microsoft.com copyright 2014 w3c mit ercim keio beihang all rights reserved. w3c liability trademark and document use rules apply. abstract this specification describes a method for declaring inert dom subtrees in html and manipulating them to instantiate document fragments with identical contents. status of this document this section describes the status of this document at the time of its publication. other documents may supersede this document. a list of current w3c publications and the latest revision of this technical report can be found in the w3c technical reports index at http www.w3.org tr work on this document has been discontinued and it should not be referenced or used as a basis for implementation. the features previously specified in this document are now specified in html5. this document was published by the web applications working group as a working group note. if you wish to make comments regarding this document please send them to public-webapps@w3.org subscribe archives all feedback is welcome. publication as a working group note does not imply endorsement by the w3c membership. this is a draft document and may be updated replaced or obsoleted by other documents at any time. it is inappropriate to cite this document as other than work in progress. this document was produced by a group operating under the 5 february 2004 w3c patent policy. w3c maintains a public list of any patent disclosures made in connection with the deliverables of the group that page also includes instructions for disclosing a patent. an individual who has actual knowledge of a patent which the individual believes contains essential claim s must disclose the information in accordance with section 6 of the w3c patent policy. 