html css w3c w3c standards participate membership about w3c site navigation web design and applications html css javascript web apis graphics audio and video accessibility internationalization mobile web privacy math on the web skip w3c standards web design and applications html css html css on this page what is html and xhtml what is css what is webfonts examples more info recent press releases current status of specifications and groups html the hypertext markup language and css cascading style sheets are two of the core technologies for building web pages. html provides the structure of the page css the visual and aural layout for a variety of devices. along with graphics and scripting html and css are the basis of building web pages and web applications. learn more below about what is html html is the language for describing the structure of web pages. html gives authors the means to publish online documents with headings text tables lists photos etc. retrieve online information via hypertext links at the click of a button. design forms for conducting transactions with remote services for use in searching for information making reservations ordering products etc. include spread-sheets video clips sound clips and other applications directly in their documents. with html authors describe the structure of pages using markup. the elements of the language label pieces of content such as paragraph list table and so on. what is xhtml xhtml is a variant of html that uses the syntax of xml the extensible markup language. xhtml has all the same elements for paragraphs etc. as the html variant but the syntax is slightly different. because xhtml is an xml application you can use other xml tools with it such as xslt a language for transforming xml content what is css css is the language for describing the presentation of web pages including colors layout and fonts. it allows one to adapt the presentation to different types of devices such as large screens small screens or printers. css is independent of html and can be used with any xml-based markup language. the separation of html from css makes it easier to maintain sites share style sheets across pages and tailor pages to different environments. this is referred to as the separation of structure or content from presentation. what is webfonts webfonts is a technology that enables people to use fonts on demand over the web without requiring installation in the operating system. w3c has experience in downloadable fonts through html css2 and svg. until recently downloadable fonts have not been common on the web due to the lack of an interoperable font format. the webfonts effort plans to address that through the creation of an industry-supported open font format for the web called woff examples the following very simple example of a portion of an html document illustrates how to create a link within a paragraph. when rendered on the screen or by a speech synthesizer the link text will be final report when somebody activates the link the browser will retrieve the resource identified by http www.example.com report p class moreinfo for more information see the a href http www.example.com report final report a p the class attribute on the paragraph s start tag p can be used among other thing to add style. for instance to italicize the text of all paragraphs with a class of moreinfo one could write in css p.moreinfo font-style italic by placing that rule in a separate file the style may be shared by any number of html documents. more information for more information about html and css see tutorials for html and css. for advanced document transformations and layout beyond css see xslt xsl-fo. recent w3c press releases and member testimonials html5 definition complete w3c moves to interoperability testing and performance 17 december 2012 recent press 18 june knight blog the world wide web consortium at 20 moving the web toward its full potential 18 june zdnet html5 le w3c devrait finaliser la sp cification avant la fin de l ann e 17 june redmond magazine html5 on track for w3c finalization by year s end 13 june laboratory equipment tech lets you track your data online current status of specifications learn more about the current status of specifications related to html css best practices for authoring html web fonts digital publishing these w3c groups are working on the related specifications cascading style sheets css working group html working group device apis working group forms working group internationalization working group math working group protocols and formats working group rdfa working group svg working group technical architecture group web applications working group web content accessibility guidelines working group webfonts working group xml core working group xslt working group current status html css best practices for authoring html web fonts digital publishing use it tutorials css software xhtml 1.0 strict cheat sheet xhtml basic 1.1 cheat sheet w3c cheat sheet recommended doctype declarations validators markup css logos html css footer navigation navigation home standards participate membership about w3c contact w3c contact help and faq sponsor donate site map feedback w3c updates copyright 2013 w3c mit ercim keio beihang usage policies apply. 