internationalization w3c w3c standards participate membership about w3c site navigation web design and applications html css javascript web apis graphics audio and video accessibility internationalization mobile web privacy math on the web skip w3c standards web design and applications internationalization internationalization on this page what is internationalization examples learn more what is the internationalization activity current status of specifications and groups access to the web for all has been a fundamental concern and goal of the world wide web consortium since the beginning. unfortunately it is easy to overlook the needs of people from cultures different to your own or who use different languages or writing systems. if you do you will build specifications and content that present barriers to the use of your technology or content for many people around the world. learn more below about what is internationalization if you internationalize you design or develop your content application specification and so on in a way that ensures it will work well for or can be easily adapted for users from any culture region or language. the word internationalization is often abbreviated to i18n this is widely used abbreviation derived from the fact that there are 18 letters between the i and the n examples one fundamental aspect of internationalization is to ensure that the technology supports text in any writing system of the world. this is why w3c technologies are built on the universal character set unicode. it may be necessary to also support other legacy character sets and encodings. there are other factors to consider however when using characters. for example unicode based encodings allow the exact same text to be stored using slightly different combinations of characters. for efficiency and accuracy in comparing sorting and parsing text the different sequences need to be recognised as canonically equivalent you need to consider how to manage this when developing applications or specifications that perform or rely on such tasks. sometimes different writing systems require special support. for example japanese chinese korean and mongolian can be written vertically so the w3c is ensuring css svg and xsl-fo will allow for vertical text support. text alignment and justification methods are also different for such scripts and different again for scripts like thai and tibetan. other local typographic conventions often exist for such things as emphasis annotations list numbering and the like. these typographic approaches need to be supported in style sheets. arabic hebrew persian urdu and similar languages mix right-to-left and left-to-right text on the same line and it is important to be able to control the direction of the surrounding context for that to work properly. this means that schema and format developers need to provide ways for authors to control direction in their content. schemas markup languages and formats should also support a number of other constructs needed for efficient handling of content during translation and localisation. if you are dealing with html forms or designing ontologies relating to people s names and addresses you will need to consider how to enable the many different approaches to formatting data that are possible around the world. you may also need to support alternative calendars time zones and daylight savings names and addresses in both native plus transliterated forms etc. content developers and content management systems must also be prepared to deal with linguistic and cultural issues. for example a sentence that is constructed by combining several phrases together in one language may be impossible to translate sensibly in a language with a different sentence structure. for example in the japanese translation of page 1 of 34 all elements in the phrase would be in reverse order. your application must not restrict the order in which these elements can be combined. specifications for technologies such as widgets and voice browsers should also avoid locking developers into an english-biased syntax for such things as composing messages or firing events associated with text. cultural problems also need to be considered. symbolism can be culture-specific. the check mark means correct or ok in many countries. in some countries however such as japan it can be used to mean that something is incorrect. japanese localizers may need to convert check marks to circles their symbol for correct as part of the localization process. these are just a few examples of many. the key message is that design whether it be of a markup language a protocol a content management system a widget or application etc. needs to be flexible enough to accommodate local needs. learn more try one of our task-oriented listings below or go to the internationalization activity home page. we also have a getting started page or if you just want to follow along with the latest news and ideas try the aggregated data on our planet web i18n page. authoring x html css authoring svg authoring xml developing specifications setting up a server developing schemas using the web what is the internationalization activity the internationalization activity works with w3c working groups related standards bodies and with designers developers and content authors generally to raise awareness of and thereby avoid issues related to the international use of the web. it also promotes solutions for the needs of specific cultures languages and writing systems. it does this by reviewing specifications providing advice to developers and working groups and developing guidelines specifications and outreach materials. its mission is to ensure that the world wide web is world wide. recent w3c press releases and member testimonials w3c launches work to simplify creation of content in world s languages 7 march 2012 current status of specifications learn more about the current status of specifications related to internationalization all internationalization of web design and applications internationalization of web architecture internationalization of xml internationalization of web services these w3c groups are working on the related specifications internationalization working group cascading style sheets css working group math working group xml core working group xslt working group current status internationalization all internationalization of web design and applications internationalization of web architecture internationalization of xml internationalization of web services use it tutorials tools quick tips more resources footer navigation navigation home standards participate membership about w3c contact w3c contact help and faq sponsor donate site map feedback w3c updates copyright 2013 w3c mit ercim keio beihang usage policies apply. 