meta formats w3c w3c standards participate membership about w3c site navigation web architecture protocol and meta format considerations meta formats protocols identifiers architecture principles skip w3c standards web architecture meta formats meta formats on this page what is xml what is rdf what is json current status of specifications and groups metaformats are generic formats that people can adopt when creating their own application-specific languages without having to reinvent syntax. the terms that people use to specialise a metaformat are often called vocabularies. examples of metaformats are xml rdf and json. metaformats offer advantages over creating a custom syntax for a language because they can be processed by generic tools and languages that use them can be understood by people who have learned about the metaformat. metaformats usually have a schema language that can be used to define or describe a vocabulary that uses that metaformat and query or transformation languages that can be used to access information within documents that use that metaformat. what is xml xml provides a simple standardised way to serialize information representable as labelled trees with annotations and cross-references allowing a free choice of markup vocabulary. this not only makes it well-suited for human-authored documents particularly given its facility for mixed content plain and marked-up text and built-in support for unicode but also means it is a useful syntax for all kinds of machine-to-machine data transfer. xhtml docbook and dita are examples of xml-based languages primarily intended for documents machine-to-machine uses include atom upnp for networked device discovery and aemp for construction equipment there are several schema languages for xml including xml schema and relax ng which enable xml-based languages to be validated. there are also generic methods for querying and transforming xml through xpath and xslt xquery and xml processing pipelines. what is rdf rdf is a language designed for the expression of arbitrary information about arbitrary things. it has variant surface syntaxes including turtle and rdfa the latter allowing embedding in html and thus promoting machine readability of information found in html documents. rdf is useful for expressing graph structured information in which each entity is linkable through a url and is thus the core data model for the semantic web. common rdf vocabularies which can be used with any rdf syntax are dublin core terms foaf skos and schema.org. rdf vocabularies can be described by rdf schemas or owl ontologies. these are primarily used for inference to deduce new information from data expressed in rdf. more flexible reasoning for rdf can be described using rif. data stored within rdf stores known as triplestores can be queried and updated using sparql. what is json json is a metaformat that is useful for expressing tree-based data structures. json s key benefit is that it tersely expresses the kinds of data structures commonly used in programming languages particularly javascript which makes it very easy to create and consume. json is rarely used with a declarative schema and it is usually processed by being parsed into the native data structures used by a particular programming language. however there are several query languages currently under development including json path jaql and jsoniq. current status of specifications learn more about the current status of specifications related to xml rdf xhtml modularization these w3c groups are working on the related specifications government linked data working group linked data platform ldp working group rdf working group rdfa working group semantic web interest group technical architecture group xml core working group xml processing model working group current status xml rdf xhtml modularization use it tutorials business case software validators rdf footer navigation navigation home standards participate membership about w3c contact w3c contact help and faq sponsor donate site map feedback w3c updates copyright 2013 w3c mit ercim keio beihang usage policies apply. 