privacy w3c w3c standards participate membership about w3c site navigation web design and applications html css javascript web apis graphics audio and video accessibility internationalization mobile web privacy math on the web skip w3c standards web design and applications privacy privacy on this page what is p3p what is powder current status of specifications and groups as the web provides many mechanisms to interlink data across systems it is important that it keeps the possibility for users that want or need it to keep their personal information private and fragmented. what is do not track do not track is a technology that lets users express their preferences around online tracking while browsing the web. advertisers analytics publishers and other online services that respect the dnt signal will limit the behavioral tracking of their users. by creating a simple persistent and technology-neutral preference do not track will enhance users control of their browsing information and improve their online privacy. the http dom mechanism for expressing a do not track preference and policies for server-side compliance are both currently in the process of standardization in the tracking protection working group. what is p3p the platform for privacy preferences project p3p enables websites to express their privacy practices in a standard format that can be retrieved automatically and interpreted easily by user agents. p3p user agents will allow users to be informed of site practices in both machine- and human-readable formats and to automate decision-making based on these practices when appropriate. thus users need not read the privacy policies at every site they visit. see the list of p3p software. p3p uses machine readable descriptions to describe the collection and use of data. sites implementing such policies make their practices explicit and thus open them to public scrutiny. browsers can help the user to understand those privacy practises with smart interfaces. most importantly browsers can this way develop a predictable behavior when blocking content like cookies thus giving a real incentive to ecommerce sites to behave in a privacy friendly way. this avoids the current scattering of cookie-blocking behaviors based on individual heuristics imagined by the implementer of the blocking tool which will make the creation of stateful services on the web a pain because the state-retrieval will be unpredictable. what is powder powder the protocol for web description resources provides a mechanism to describe and discover web resources and helps the users to make a decision whether a given resource is of interest. there are a variety of use cases from providing a better means to describing web resources and creating trust marks to aiding content discovery child protection and semantic web searches. recent w3c press releases and member testimonials w3c announces peter swire as new co-chair for do not track standard 28 november 2012 recent press 16 june pcworld.fr facebook va ignorer le do not track facebook will ignore do not track 21 may nytimes.com bits california urges websites to disclose online tracking 8 may data guidance usa w3c s huge milestone on dnt moves to last call status 3 may heise online yahoo ignoriert do not track bewusst yahoo ignores do not track deliberately current status of specifications learn more about the current status of specifications related to powder p3p http these w3c groups are working on the related specifications evaluation and repair tools working group tracking protection working group web applications working group current status powder p3p http use it tutorials p3p software powder software validators p3p footer navigation navigation home standards participate membership about w3c contact w3c contact help and faq sponsor donate site map feedback w3c updates copyright 2013 w3c mit ercim keio beihang usage policies apply. 