processing w3c w3c standards participate membership about w3c site navigation xml technology publishing processing components query transformation security schema xml essentials skip w3c standards xml technology processing processing on this page what is a processing model how is a processing model used learn more current status of specifications and groups a processing model defines what operations should be performed in what order on an xml document. what is xproc an unusual characteristic of xml is that documents in that format do not have intrinsic meaning any xml processor is free to interpret any xml document in any way. this is sometimes called the xml promise. however it is often useful to be able to suggest how a particular document might be processed. the xproc specification provides a way to do that xproc an xml pipeline language is an xml-based language for describing operations to be performed on xml documents. note that there is no single processing model for all xml documents and there is no default processing model. xproc xml pipeline is one example of a way to say how to process an xml document. you can also have multiple xml pipelines that you might select from to process a given document. what is xproc used for use xproc to say that a particular document or set of documents should be processed in a certain order for example first xinclude and then xsd schema validation and then xslt with a particular xsl stylesheet. examples pipeline xmlns http www.w3.org ns xproc xinclude validate-with-xml-schema input port schema document href http example.com path to schema.xsd input validate-with-xml-schema xslt input port stylesheet document href http example.com path to stylesheet.xsl input xslt pipeline this example indicates that a document with which this pipeline is associated should first have xinclude processing done on it then be validated with a specific schema and finally have an xslt stylesheet applied to the result of validation. current status of specifications learn more about the current status of specifications related to xml pipeline xproc xinclude these w3c groups are working on the related specifications xml processing model working group xml core working group contact liam r. e. quin liam@w3.org current status xml pipeline xproc xinclude use it tutorials business case software footer navigation navigation home standards participate membership about w3c contact w3c contact help and faq sponsor donate site map feedback w3c updates copyright 2010 w3c mit ercim keio beihang usage policies apply. 