publishing w3c w3c standards participate membership about w3c site navigation xml technology publishing processing components query transformation security schema xml essentials skip w3c standards xml technology publishing publishing on this page what is topic what is topic used for examples learn more current status of specifications and groups the extensible markup language xml originally grew out of the technical publication community. people had been using the larger more complex sgml standard to publish technical documentation manuals financial reports books and much more but they needed something that would fit in better with the world wide web and that would have a lower total cost. the extensible stylesheet language xsl came out of earlier work at iso on dsssl the document styling and semantics specification language but adapted for xml. what is xsl-fo xsl is in two parts. the first part xslt is used to transform xml documents into something that one can see how to format in fact for publishing into the xml vocabulary that is the second part of xsl xsl-fo. xsl-fo the formatting objects part of xsl is an xml markup language for describing page layout and formatting. you can use xsl-fo to publish even large or complex multilingual xml documents to html pdf or other formats you can include svg diagrams and mathml formulas as well as other foreign objects. what is xsl-fo used for you can find xsl-fo in use wherever automated publishing is needed everything from bank statements to driving licenses from text books to database reports. xsl-fo is also used by some organizations for brochures and magazines it has more sophisticated formatting than html and css but is still a standard. recent press 10 august computer sweden microsoft satsar p html 5 microsoft puts effort on html 5 7 august poynter online how ap s news registry will and won t work 6 august international relations and security network.com web 3.0 installing the plumbing 5 august zdnet the future of enterprise data in a radically open and web-based world current status of specifications learn more about the current status of specifications related to xsl-fo these w3c groups are working on the related specifications xslt working group internationalization working group contact liam r. e. quin liam@w3.org current status xsl-fo use it tutorials business case software logos xml footer navigation navigation home standards participate membership about w3c contact w3c contact help and faq sponsor donate site map feedback w3c updates copyright 2010 w3c mit ercim keio beihang usage policies apply. 