role attribute 1.0 role attribute 1.0 an attribute to support the role classification of elements w3c recommendation 28 march 2013 this version http www.w3.org tr 2013 rec-role-attribute-20130328 latest published version http www.w3.org tr role-attribute latest editor s draft http www.w3.org wai pf role-attribute previous version http www.w3.org tr 2012 pr-role-attribute-20121213 editor shane mccarron applied testing and technology inc. shane@aptest.com authors ben adida creative commons mark birbeck webbackplane steven pemberton cwi w3c t. v. raman google inc. richard schwerdtfeger ibm corporation please refer to the errata for this document which may include some normative corrections. see also translations. the english version of this specification is the only normative version. non-normative translations may also be available. copyright 2006-2013 w3c mit ercim keio beihang all rights reserved. w3c liability trademark and document use rules apply. abstract the role attribute defined in this specification allows the author to annotate markup languages with machine-extractable semantic information about the purpose of an element. use cases include accessibility device adaptation server-side processing and complex data description. this attribute can be integrated into any markup language. in particular schema implementations are provided to facilitate with languages based upon xhtml modularization xhtml-modularization11-2e the role attribute is necessary to support accessible rich internet applications wai-aria wai-aria to define roles in xml-based languages when the languages do not define their own role attribute. although this is the reason the role attribute is published by the protocols and formats working group the attribute has more general use cases as well. status of this document this section describes the status of this document at the time of its publication. other documents may supersede this document. a list of current w3c publications and the latest revision of this technical report can be found in the w3c technical reports index at http www.w3.org tr this is the role attribute w3c recommendation by the protocols formats working group of the web accessibility initiative. this document has been reviewed by w3c members by software developers and by other w3c groups and interested parties and is endorsed by the director as a w3c recommendation. it is a stable document and may be used as reference material or cited from another document. w3c s role in making the recommendation is to draw attention to the specification and to promote its widespread deployment. this enhances the functionality and interoperability of the web. as a finalized document this version of the role attribute is not likely to undergo further changes. the protocols and formats working group expects that any further enhancements to the role attribute would take place in a future version of accessible rich internet applications wai-aria instead of in a future version of this specification. the working group does not plan to make formal responses to comments on the role attribute recommendation but will consider input for errata or other future work. start with the instructions for commenting page to submit comments preferred or send email to public-pfwg-comments@w3.org comment archive a history of changes to role attribute 1.0 is available. this document was produced by a group operating under the 5 february 2004 w3c patent policy. w3c maintains a public list of any patent disclosures made in connection with the deliverables of the group that page also includes instructions for disclosing a patent. an individual who has actual knowledge of a patent which the individual believes contains essential claim s must disclose the information in accordance with section 6 of the w3c patent policy. table of contents 1. introduction 2. conformance 2.1 document conformance 2.2 host language conformance 3. the role attribute 3.1 extending the collection of roles 4. using role in conjunction with rdfa a. xhtml role attribute module a.1 dtd implementation a.1.1 qualified names module a.2 schema implementation a.2.1 attributes module b. acknowledgements b.1 participants in the pfwg at the time of publication b.2 other previously active pfwg participants and contributors b.3 enabling funders c. references c.1 normative references c.2 informative references 1. introduction this section is non-normative. this document defines an attribute designed be used to help improve the accessibility and semantic markup of documents. it has been developed in conjunction with the accessibility community and other groups to make it easier to describe the semantic meaning of document content. an important though not exclusive use case for the role attribute is to support wai-aria the role attribute meets the requirements of role attribute in wai-aria section 7.1 enabling xml10 languages that incorporate this attribute to use wai-aria roles. at time of this publication no xml-based languages are known to use wai-aria but this attribute is important to enable planned future support such as in svg by contrast support for wai-aria in html5 includes an attribute named role the use of that attribute within html5 is consistent with the definition of the role attribute in this specification although conforming use may be limited to the use of term s within the value of the attribute. 2. conformance as well as sections marked as non-normative all authoring guidelines diagrams examples and notes in this specification are non-normative. everything else in this specification is normative. the key words must must not required should should not recommended may and optional in this specification are to be interpreted as described in rfc2119 2.1 document conformance the role attribute does not represent a stand-alone document type. it is intended to be integrated into other host languages such as svg html or xhtml. a conforming role attribute document is a document that requires only the facilities described as mandatory in this specification and the facilities described as mandatory in its host language. such a document must meet all the following criteria the document must conform to the constraints expressed in its host language implementation. if the host language is an xml xml10-4e markup language and is in the xhtml namespace http www.w3.org 1999 xhtml there are no additional requirements. if the host language is an xml markup language and is not in the xhtml namespace and the host language does not incorporate this attribute in no namespace then the document must contain an xml namespace declaration for the role attribute module namespace xml-names11 the namespace for role attribute module is defined to be http www.w3.org 1999 xhtml. an example start tag of a root element might look like example 1 mylang xmlns http www.example.com dtd mylang xmlns xh http www.w3.org 1999 xhtml xml lang en 2.2 host language conformance when the role attribute is included in a host language all of the facilities required in this specification must be included in the host language. in addition the attribute defined in this specification must be included in the content model of the host language. 3. the role attribute this specification defines the role attribute. the role attribute takes as its value one or more whitespace separated termorcurieorabsiris which is defined in rdfa-core each component of the value maps to an iri that corresponds to a vocabulary term that should be defined using rdf. note the datatype used for role permits the use of a term a curie as defined in rdfa-core or a full iri. a term is an item from a vocabulary. the default vocabulary for use with role is defined in xhtml-vocab a host language may define a different default vocabulary. note the specific vocabulary terms from the default vocabulary are not included in this document. they are defined in xhtml-vocab to ease maintenance. the terms are drawn from wai-aria and from the original work on this document by the xhtml2 working group. the attribute describes the role s the current element plays in the context of the document. this can be used for example by applications and assistive technologies to determine the purpose of an element. this could allow a user to make informed decisions on which actions may be taken on an element and activate the selected action in a device independent way. it could also be used as a mechanism for annotating portions of a document in a domain specific way e.g. a legal term taxonomy although the role attribute may be used to add semantics to an element authors should use elements with inherent semantics such as p rather than layering semantics on semantically neutral elements such as div role paragraph the following is an example of a good appropriate use of the role attribute example 2 div role main h1 this is the main content of the page h1 p here is some content that is the primary purpose of this web page. p div 3.1 extending the collection of roles it is possible to define additional role values. vocabulary authors must define such additional role values in their own vocabulary. the uri associated with that vocabulary should resolve to a resource that allows for the machine and human discovery of the definition of the roles in the vocabulary. note a good example of such a resource is the default vocabulary document at xhtml-vocab this document uses a format compatible with the requirements of rdfa-core section 9 for machine-discoverable rdfa initial contexts. 4. using role in conjunction with rdfa if a host language contains the role attribute then an rdfa processor processing a document written in that host language according to the rules of that host language may generate additional triples for role attributes. if these additional triples are being generated then they must be generated as follows if id is present it is used to supply the subject by concatenating the document s base a fragment separator and the value of id. otherwise the subject is a unique newly created bnode. the predicate is the term role in the vocabulary defined at http www.w3.org 1999 xhtml vocab. each value of role is an object forming an rdf triple with the subject and predicate defined above. an rdfa processor must behave as if there is an in-scope vocabulary of http www.w3.org 1999 xhtml vocab# for the value s of the role attribute. note remember that role values are defined using the datatype termorcurieorabsiris. an rdfa processor will intepret these values using the rules for that that datatype as defined in rdfa-core a. xhtml role attribute module a.1 dtd implementation the dtd implementation of xhtml role attribute module conforms to the requirements defined in xhtml-modularization11-2e consequently it provides a qualified names declaration module. a.1.1 qualified names module note that this module defines the parameter entity xhtml-role-attrs.qname this entity is intended to be used in the attribute lists of elements in any host language that permits the use of the role attribute on elements in its own namespace. if a host language does not permit role in its namespace then the host language driver should set a parameter entity xhtml-role.prefixed to include and a parameter entity xhtml-role.prefix to a value that is the prefix for the xhtml role attribute module attribute. xhtml role qname module file xhtml-role-qname-1.mod this is xhtml role the role attribute module for xhtml. copyright 2006 w3c mit ercim keio all rights reserved. this dtd module is identified by the public and system identifiers public w3c entities xhtml role attribute qnames 1.0 en system http www.w3.org markup dtd xhtml-role-qname-1.mod revisions none xhtml role attribute qname qualified name module this module is contained in two parts labeled section a and b section a declares parameter entities to support namespace- qualified names namespace declarations and name prefixing for xhtml role and extensions. section b declares parameter entities used to provide namespace-qualified names for the xhtml role attribute role.qname the xmlns-qualified name for role xhtml role extensions would create a module similar to this one. section a xhtml role attribute xml namespace framework 1. declare a xhtml-role.prefixed conditional section keyword used to activate namespace prefixing. the default value should inherit ns.prefixed from the dtd driver so that unless overridden the default behavior follows the overall dtd prefixing scheme. entity ns.prefixed ignore entity xhtml-role.prefixed ns.prefixed 2. declare a parameter entity eg. xhtml-role.xmlns containing the uri reference used to identify the xhtml role attribute namespace entity xhtml-role.xmlns http www.w3.org 1999 xhtml 3. declare parameter entities eg. xml.prefix containing the default namespace prefix string s to use when prefixing is enabled. this may be overridden in the dtd driver or the internal subset of an document instance. if no default prefix is desired this may be declared as an empty string. note as specified in xmlnames the namespace prefix serves as a proxy for the uri reference and is not in itself significant. entity xhtml-role.prefix 4. declare parameter entities eg. xhtml-role.pfx containing the colonized prefix es eg. xhtml-role.prefix used when prefixing is active an empty string when it is not. xhtml-role.prefixed entity xhtml-role.pfx xhtml-role.prefix entity xhtml-role.pfx declare qualified name extensions here entity xhtml-role-qname-extra.mod xhtml-role-qname-extra.mod 5. the parameter entity xhtml-role.xmlns.extra.attrib may be redeclared to contain any non-xhtml role attribute namespace declaration attributes for namespaces embedded in xml. the default is an empty string. xlink should be included here if used in the dtd. entity xhtml-role.xmlns.extra.attrib section b xml qualified names 6. this section declares parameter entities used to provide namespace-qualified names for the xhtml role attribute. entity xhtml-role.role.qname xhtml-role.pfx role the following defines a pe for use in the attribute sets of elements in other namespaces that want to incorporate the xhtml role attribute. note that in this case the xhtml-role.pfx should be defined. entity xhtml-role.attrs.qname xhtml-role.pfx role cdata implied end of xhtml-role-qname-1.mod a.2 schema implementation the schema implementation of xhtml role attribute module conforms to the requirements defined in xhtml-modularization11-2e it is included here as an example implementation. a.2.1 attributes module xml version 1.0 encoding utf-8 xs schema xmlns xs http www.w3.org 2001 xmlschema elementformdefault qualified xmlns xh11d http www.w3.org 1999 xhtml datatypes xs import namespace http www.w3.org 1999 xhtml datatypes schemalocation xhtml-datatypes-1.xsd xs annotation xs documentation this is the xml schema attribute module for xhtml role id overview.html v 1.7 2013-03-28 15 13 26 cooper exp xs documentation xs documentation source xhtml-copyright-1.xsd xs documentation source http www.w3.org tr role-attribute#a_role xs annotation xs attribute name role type xh11d termoruriorcuries xs schema b. acknowledgements the following people contributed to the development of this document. b.1 participants in the pfwg at the time of publication david bolter mozilla sally cain royal national institute of blind people rnib alex qiang chen university of manchester charles chen google inc. michael cooper w3c mit james craig apple inc. steve faulkner invited expert the paciello group geoff freed invited expert ncam kentarou fukuda ibm georgios grigoriadis sap ag jon gunderson invited expert uiuc markus gylling daisy consortium sean hayes microsoft corporation kenny johar microsoft corporation shilpi kapoor barrierbreak technologies matthew king ibm corporation diego la monica international webmasters association html writers guild iwa-hwg rajesh lal nokia corporation gez lemon international webmasters association html writers guild iwa-hwg anders markussen opera software shane mccarron invited expert aptest charles mccathienevile opera software mary jo mueller ibm corporation james nurthen oracle corporation joshue o connor invited expert ncbi centre for inclusive technology sarah pulis media access australia t.v. raman google inc. janina sajka invited expert the linux foundation joseph scheuhammer invited expert inclusive design research centre ocad university stefan schnabel sap ag richard schwerdtfeger ibm corporation lisa seeman invited expert cynthia shelly microsoft corporation andi snow-weaver ibm corporation gregg vanderheiden invited expert trace research and development center l onie watson nomensa gottfried zimmermann invited expert access technologies group b.2 other previously active pfwg participants and contributors jim allan tsb simon bates chris blouch aol judy brewer w3c mit ben caldwell trace charles chen google inc. christian cohrs dimitar denev frauenhofer gesellschaft donald evans aol kentarou fukuda ibm corporation becky gibson ibm alfred s. gilman andres gonzalez adobe systems inc. georgios grigoriadis sap ag jeff grimes oracle barbara hartel john hrvatin microsoft corporation masahiko kaneko microsoft corporation earl johnson sun jael kurz diego la monica international webmasters association html writers guild iwa-hwg aaron leventhal ibm corporation alex li sap thomas logan hisoftware william loughborough linda mao microsoft anders markussen opera software matthew may adobe systems inc. artur ortega yahoo inc. lisa pappas society for technical communication stc dave pawson rnib stephen pemberton cwi david poehlman simon pieters opera software t.v. raman google inc. gregory rosmaita tony ross microsoft corporation martin schaus sap ag marc silbey microsoft corporation henri sivonen mozilla henny swan opera software vitaly sourikov mike squillace ibm ryan williams oracle tom wlodkowski. b.3 enabling funders this publication has been funded in part with federal funds from the u.s. department of education national institute on disability and rehabilitation research nidrr under contract number ed-ose-10-c-0067. the content of this publication does not necessarily reflect the views or policies of the u.s. department of education nor does mention of trade names commercial products or organizations imply endorsement by the u.s. government. c. references c.1 normative references rdfa-core shane mccarron et al. rdfa core 1.1 syntax and processing rules for embedding rdf through attributes. 7 june 2012. w3c recommendation. url http www.w3.org tr 2012 rec-rdfa-core-20120607 rfc2119 s. bradner. key words for use in rfcs to indicate requirement levels. march 1997. internet rfc 2119. url http www.ietf.org rfc rfc2119.txt xhtml-modularization11-2e shane mccarron. xhtml modularization 1.1 second edition. 29 july 2010. w3c recommendation. url http www.w3.org tr 2010 rec-xhtml-modularization-20100729 xhtml-vocab xhtml 2 working group. xhtml vocabulary. url http www.w3.org 1999 xhtml vocab xml10 c. m. sperberg-mcqueen et al. extensible markup language xml 1.0 fifth edition 26 november 2008. w3c recommendation. url http www.w3.org tr 2008 rec-xml-20081126 xml10-4e c. m. sperberg-mcqueen et al. extensible markup language xml 1.0 fourth edition 16 august 2006. w3c recommendation. url http www.w3.org tr 2006 rec-xml-20060816 c.2 informative references html5 robin berjon et al. html5. 17 december 2012. w3c candidate recommendation. url http www.w3.org tr html5 wai-aria james craig michael cooper et al. accessible rich internet applications wai-aria 1.0. 24 february 2009. w3c working draft. url http www.w3.org tr 2009 wd-wai-aria-20090224 xml-names11 andrew layman et al. namespaces in xml 1.1 second edition 16 august 2006. w3c recommendation. url http www.w3.org tr 2006 rec-xml-names11-20060816 