schema w3c w3c standards participate membership about w3c site navigation xml technology publishing processing components query transformation security schema xml essentials skip w3c standards xml technology schema schema on this page what is an xml schema what is an xml schema used for examples learn more current status of specifications and groups an xml schema is a language for expressing constraints about xml documents. what is an xml schema an xml schema is a language for expressing constraints about xml documents. there are several different schema languages in widespread use but the main ones are document type definitions dtds relax-ng schematron and w3c xsd xml schema definitions from this page you can find out more about dtds and w3c xsd since those are the primary schema languages defined at w3c. what is xml schema used for a schema can be used to provide a list of elements and attributes in a vocabulary to associate types such as integer string etc. or more specifically such as hatsize sock_colour etc. with values found in documents to constrain where elements and attributes can appear and what can appear inside those elements such as saying that a chapter title occurs inside a chapter and that a chapter must consist of a chapter title followed by one or more paragraphs of text to provide documentation that is both human-readable and machine-processable to give a formal description of one or more documents. information in schema documents is often used by xml-aware editing systems so that they can offer users the most likely elements to occur at any given location in a document. checking a document against a schema is known as validating against that schema for a dtd this is just validating but for any other type of schema the type is mentioned such as xsd validation or relax-ng validation. validating against a schema is an important component of quality assurance. the service modeling language sml provides a framework for relating multiple xsd documents to one or more documents in a single validation episode. since xsd supports associating data types with element and attribute content it is also used for data binding that is for software components that read and write xml representations of computer programming-language objects. examples document type definitions are defined in the xml recommendation. they are very widely supported with a high degree of interoperability. w3c xml schema definitions are defined in the w3c xml schema specification. this is in three parts of which the first part numbered zero is an introductory document. learn more explanation... current status of specifications learn more about the current status of specifications related to xml schema xml design techniques these w3c groups are working on the related specifications internationalization working group protocols and formats working group contact liam r. e. quin liam@w3.org current status xml schema xml design techniques use it tutorials business case software validators xml schema footer navigation navigation home standards participate membership about w3c contact w3c contact help and faq sponsor donate site map feedback w3c updates copyright 2010 w3c mit ercim keio beihang usage policies apply. 