service description w3c w3c standards participate membership about w3c site navigation web of services protocols service description skip w3c standards web of services service description service description on this page what is topic what is topic used for examples learn more current status of specifications and groups a service description plays an important role in enabling access to a service. most service description languages are designed for machine consumption allowing for the automatic creation of code skeletons easier search and classification of services. however people may also find descriptions useful to learn about the use of parameters or the precise semantics of some operation. data description there are several aspects in data description like the definition of the data structure of the type and values its semantic etc for xml xml schema provide structural type and values descriptions for web services wsdl provides via the use of xml schema the data formats flowing in and out sawsdl provides a way to add semantic descriptions to xml schema and wdsl descriptions. web services description wsdl defines not only the format and values of data flowing in and out of the service but also define the endpoints supported operations message exchange patterns mep everything relative to the operative description of the web services endpoints. ws-choreography describe the flow of messages between a set of services participating in a global choreography of exchanges without having a controller. it can also be used to validate a posteriori a serie of logged exchanges between different parties. ws policy describe the policies in use when accessing a service through policy assertions like security policies transport protocol selection etc learn more see the xml schema primer. current status of specifications learn more about the current status of specifications related to wsdl web services choreography web services policy semantic annotation for wsdl and xml schema xml schema service modeling language sml web services resource access these w3c groups are working on the related specifications no groups at this time see the list of current and closed groups. current status wsdl web services choreography web services policy semantic annotation for wsdl and xml schema xml schema service modeling language sml web services resource access use it tutorials business case software validators xml schema footer navigation navigation home standards participate membership about w3c contact w3c contact help and faq sponsor donate site map feedback w3c updates copyright 2013 w3c mit ercim keio beihang usage policies apply. 