terms for describing people terms for describing people w3c working draft 05 april 2012 this version http www.w3.org tr 2012 wd-vocab-people-20120405 latest published version http www.w3.org tr vocab-people latest editor s draft https dvcs.w3.org hg gld raw-file default people index.html editor michael hausenblas deri copyright 2012 w3c mit ercim keio all rights reserved. w3c liability trademark and document use rules apply. abstract this document defines a set of terms for describing people. it defines how to describe people s characteristics such as names or addresses and how to relate people to other things for example to organizations or projects. for each term guidance on the usage within a running example is provided. this document also defines mappings to widely used vocabularies to enable interoperability. status of this document this section describes the status of this document at the time of its publication. other documents may supersede this document. a list of current w3c publications and the latest revision of this technical report can be found in the w3c technical reports index at http www.w3.org tr this document is work in progress. you might also want to check the accompanying wiki page of the gld working group for ongoing discussions. this document was published by the government linked data gld working group as a first public working draft. this document is intended to become a w3c recommendation. if you wish to make comments regarding this document please send them to public-gld-comments@w3.org subscribe archives all feedback is welcome. publication as a working draft does not imply endorsement by the w3c membership. this is a draft document and may be updated replaced or obsoleted by other documents at any time. it is inappropriate to cite this document as other than work in progress. this document was produced by a group operating under the 5 february 2004 w3c patent policy. w3c maintains a public list of any patent disclosures made in connection with the deliverables of the group that page also includes instructions for disclosing a patent. an individual who has actual knowledge of a patent which the individual believes contains essential claim s must disclose the information in accordance with section 6 of the w3c patent policy. table of contents 1. introduction 1.1 terminology 1.2 conventions 1.3 walkthrough example 2. use cases and requirements 2.1 uc1 finding a politician 2.2 uc2 provide spending of local authority 2.3 uc3 public tenders 2.4 uc4 awarded bids 2.5 uc5 budget positions and salaries 2.6 uc6 lobbying activity 2.7 uc7 question time archive 2.8 requirements 3. what is a person 4. relating a person to other entities 4.1 relating a person to a contact information 4.2 relating a person to another person 4.3 relating a person to an organization 4.4 relating a person to a building or room 4.5 relating a person to a project 4.6 relating a person to online posts 5. terms 6. interoperability considerations 6.1 mapping to isa core person vocabulary 6.2 mapping to schema.org 6.3 mapping to personal information model pimo a. acknowledgments b. references b.1 normative references b.2 informative references scope this document is aimed at both publishers and consumers of linked data. we assume that the reader has a certain familiarity with rdf and rdf schema as well as well-known vocabularies such as foaf or dublin core. the goal of the document is to specify an interoperable way to describe people and their relationships to other entities such as organisations or projects. 1. introduction this section is non-normative. 1.1 terminology source data data from datastores such as rdbs or spreadsheets that acts as a source for the linked data publishing process. publisher a person or organization that exposes source data as linked data on the web. consumer a person or agent that uses linked data from the web. todo point out definition of source data in the bp document for further details. 1.2 conventions the key words must must not required should should not recommended may and optional in this specification are to be interpreted as described in rfc 2119 rfc2119 examples of rdf serialisations in this document are written in the turtle turtle syntax we assume the following namespace prefix bindings unless otherwise stated prefix iri rdf http www.w3.org 1999 02 22-rdf-syntax-ns# rdfs http www.w3.org 2000 01 rdf-schema# dct http purl.org dc terms xsd http www.w3.org 2001 xmlschema# 1.3 walkthrough example in many cases source data contains data about people and other related entities. we will use the following text as an example throughout the document to demonstrate the usage of terms jane doe is ceo of colcids inc. headquartered in 2242 old middlefield way mountain view ca united states. recently colcids won a contract for providing an open data platform awarded by the santa clara county. the project called opendata4santaclara starts on 1 feb 2013 and runs initially for three months. jane s contact point in the county of santa clara is bj rk gu mundsd ttir. to ensure a successful project delivery jane has invited 東 海林 賢 蔵 a business contact and open data guru she recently met at a local event to brief her and the coolcids team on the challenges and requirements in the domain. note if you re not familiar with people s names throughout the world you might want to read the personal names around the world article provided by the w3c internationalization i18n activity. a visual representation of the walkthrough example as a graph big version 2. use cases and requirements this section is non-normative. todo describe real world use cases and derive requirements common to all to decide what is and what is not in scope re target entities. 2.1 uc1 finding a politician scenario a publisher wants to provide contact details for politicians responsible for a certain region and or topic. real-world example writetothem. requirements contact details of politician incl. name address email phone number fax number area of responsibility office location membership in a body such as parliament etc. 2.2 uc2 provide spending of local authority scenario a publisher wants to provide an overview of how a local authority such as a county council spends its money. real-world example councillors allowances and expenses 2010 fingal county council ireland. requirements contact details of politician incl. name address email phone number fax number membership in a body such as parliament etc. expense incl. type event amount 2.3 uc3 public tenders scenario a publisher wants to provide access to public tenders for transparency or accountability applications. real-world example tenders electronic daily by the european union and it s linked open data version. requirements contact details of contracting authority object of the contract contract duration and conditions 2.4 uc4 awarded bids scenario a publisher wants to provide a listing of awarded bids. real-world example awarded bids alabama department of finance usa. requirements contact details of contracting authority and buyer object of the contract action date 2.5 uc5 budget positions and salaries scenario a publisher wants to inform about the budget positions along with salaries. real-world example budget positions and salaries in 2011 appropriation ordinance city of chicago usa. requirements department codes and details such as area of responsibility position incl. title assigned budget type etc. amount 2.6 uc6 lobbying activity scenario a publisher wants to disclose lobbying activities. real-world example lobbying activity state of california usa. requirements contact details of individual lobbyists lobbyist relationships to companies such as membership in a body etc. 2.7 uc7 question time archive scenario a publisher wants to provide an archive of online question times for a certain topic and or politician. real-world example askneelie by neelie kroes vice president of the european commission europe. requirements online handle of person who answers and people who ask questions topics via hashtags or indirect via question sequence of questions and answers such as follow-ups etc. 2.8 requirements requirement uc1 uc2 uc3 uc4 uc5 uc6 uc7 contact details area of responsibility location membership in body expense or budget type events amount object of contract online handle conversation topic todo describe how we determine which requirements are common to all uc for example we could say that a requirement must at least show up in half of the uc etc. 3. what is a person the core concept we are dealing with in this document is that of a person. a person in the context of this specification is defined as an entity of type foaf person. if only the person s name is known foaf name must be used. http data.sccgov.org people bj rkg rdf type foaf person foaf name bj rk gu mundsd ttir how to provide further details about a person such as an address is specified in section relating a person to a contact information. best practice 1 deriving domain-specific person types one sometimes finds specialisations of a person in a domain for example in the legal domain there is a distinction made between a natural person and a legal person. in such a case the publisher should in addition to the domain-specific type e.g. legal naturalperson explicitly set the type foaf person in order to increase interoperability. this also allow systems that do not perform reasoning for example plain sparql processors to benefit from it. read more 4. relating a person to other entities beyond stating the basic characteristics of a person one can relate a person to a target entity such as an organisation or project. the following sections normatively specify how to do this. for any target entity type not listed in the below sections the publisher is free to use any appropriate vocabulary. see also the link vocabulary selection section of the best practices for publishing linked data document for guidance on how to find and select such a vocabulary. issue-18 4.1 relating a person to a contact information in order to relate a person to a contact information such as typically found on a business card the contact information must be represented using vcard and issue-22 the link type used between a person and a contact information must be gldp card. issue-24 prefix gldp http www.w3.org ns people# prefix http colcids.com person 42 a foaf person gldp card 42#bc 42#bc a v vcard v fn jane doe 4.2 relating a person to another person in order to relate a person to another person one must use the foaf vocabulary specification to state that one person knows another person foaf knows must be used. to state other relationships between people the relationship vocabulary should be used. http colcids.com person 42 foaf knows http opendataguru.net me best practice 2 trusting people s relationships a foaf knows only establishes an unidirectional claim that someone knows someone else. the relation should only be considered to be of a mutual nature if the other person sets a foaf knows relation as well. read more 4.3 relating a person to an organization in order to relate a person to an organization one must use the organization ontology. http colcids.com company a org formalorganization http colcids.com person 42 a foaf person bn123 a org membership org organization http colcids.com company org member http colcids.com person 42 issue-19 4.4 relating a person to a building or room in order to relate a person to a building or room one must use the buildings and rooms vocabulary. to state that a person is located in a building or room rooms occupant must be used. prefix rooms http vocab.deri.ie rooms# prefix http colcids.com person 42 a foaf person cchq a rooms building rooms contains r101 r101 a rooms room rooms occupant http colcids.com person 42 issue-23 4.5 relating a person to a project in order to relate a person to a project one must use the foaf vocabulary specification. prefix gldp http www.w3.org ns people# prefix xsd http www.w3.org 2001 xmlschema# prefix http data.sccgov.org project http data.sccgov.org people bj rkg a foaf person opendata4santaclara a foaf project gldp title opendata4santaclara rdfs label opendata4santaclara gldp lead http data.sccgov.org people bj rkg gldp starts 2013-02-01t00 00 00z xsd datetime gldp ends 2013-05-01t00 00 00z xsd datetime best practice 3 multiple label properties in order to enable generic linked data browsers such as tabulator which typically hard-code well-known label terms to display human readable labels rather than uris one should repeat the content of the gldp title s literal object in an rdfs label literal object. issue-20 4.6 relating a person to online posts in order to relate a person to online posts such as blog posts mailing list posts etc one must use the sioc core ontology specification. prefix sioc http rdfs.org sioc ns# http blog.colcids.com 2012 12 01 launching-opendata4santaclara a sioc post dct title opendata4santaclara will launch in early 2013 dct created 2012-12-01t17 25 30z sioc has_creator http colcids.com person 42 http colcids.com person 42 a sioc user 5. terms this section defines terms that allow to relate a person to other entities such as contact information etc. the terms below are defined in the namespace uri http www.w3.org ns people# and the preferred namespace prefix for the namespace uri is gldp. an implementer of this spec must support the following terms term definition gldp card relates a foaf person to a v vcard read a person has a business card. gldp ends specifies the end date of a foaf project as an xsd datetime xmlschema2 read a project ends on date. gldp lead relates a foaf project to a foaf person read a project has a project lead. gldp starts specifies the start date of a foaf project as an xsd datetime xmlschema2 read a project starts on date. gldp title specifies the title of a foaf project as an xsd string xmlschema2 read a projects has a title. 6. interoperability considerations our concept of a person is based on foaf person but there are many more conceptualisations in use for example as defined by the interoperability solutions for european public administrations isa project the schema.org project by the search engine providers bing google yahoo or as found in the personal information model pimo by the semantic desktop project. to enable interoperability and in general to make the data more useful we define mappings of terms in the following. an implementer of this spec should support these mappings. issue-21 6.1 mapping to isa core person vocabulary todo evaluate isa core person vocabulary and identify how and what to map. 6.2 mapping to schema.org todo evaluate schema person and identify how and what to map. 6.3 mapping to personal information model pimo todo evaluate pimo person and identify how and what to map. a. acknowledgments the editor would like to thank the following people for their input and directions phil renato george sandro richard. b. references b.1 normative references rfc2119 s. bradner. key words for use in rfcs to indicate requirement levels. march 1997. internet rfc 2119. url http www.ietf.org rfc rfc2119.txt xmlschema2 w3c xml schema definition language xsd 1.1 part 2 datatypes david peterson et al. w3c proposed recommendation 19 january 2012. url http www.w3.org tr xmlschema11-2 b.2 informative references turtle turtle terse rdf triple language d. beckett and t. berners-lee. w3c team submission 28 march 2011. url http www.w3.org teamsubmission turtle 