tracking compliance and scope tracking compliance and scope w3c working draft 08 may 2014 this version http www.w3.org tr 2014 wd-tracking-compliance-20140508 latest published version http www.w3.org tr tracking-compliance latest editor s draft http www.w3.org 2011 tracking-protection drafts tracking-compliance.html previous version http www.w3.org tr 2014 wd-tracking-compliance-20140128 editors heather west google justin brookman cdt until september 2013 sean harvey google until june 2012 erica newland cdt until may 2012 copyright 2014 w3c mit ercim keio beihang all rights reserved. w3c liability trademark and document use rules apply. abstract this specification defines the meaning of a do not track dnt preference and sets out practices for websites to comply with this preference. status of this document this section describes the status of this document at the time of its publication. other documents may supersede this document. a list of current w3c publications and the latest revision of this technical report can be found in the w3c technical reports index at http www.w3.org tr this draft does not constitute consensus and does not claim to indicate any preferred text of the group. reviewers are advised to consult the list of issues tracked in the compliance current product and the wiki list of change proposals developed by participants in the working group. it may further be augmented by adding non-normative text that provides more information. the working group has published a last call working draft of the companion tracking preference expression document. revisions from the previous working draft primarily consist of harmonizing definitions with the tracking preference expression document. readers may review changes from the previous working draft. this document was published by the tracking protection working group as a working draft on 08 may 2014. this document is intended to become a w3c recommendation. if you wish to make comments regarding this document please send them to public-tracking-comments@w3.org subscribe archives all comments are welcome. publication as a working draft does not imply endorsement by the w3c membership. this is a draft document and may be updated replaced or obsoleted by other documents at any time. it is inappropriate to cite this document as other than work in progress. this document was produced by a group operating under the 5 february 2004 w3c patent policy. w3c maintains a public list of any patent disclosures made in connection with the deliverables of the group that page also includes instructions for disclosing a patent. an individual who has actual knowledge of a patent which the individual believes contains essential claim s must disclose the information in accordance with section 6 of the w3c patent policy. table of contents 1. scope 2. definitions 2.1 user 2.2 user agent 2.3 network interaction 2.4 user action 2.5 subrequest 2.6 party 2.7 service provider 2.8 first party 2.9 third party 2.10 deidentified 2.11 tracking 2.12 collect use share facilitate 2.13 graduated response 3. user agent compliance 4. first party compliance 5. third party compliance 5.1 third party geolocation compliance 5.2 general principles for permitted uses 5.2.1 no secondary uses 5.2.2 data minimization retention and transparency 5.2.3 no personalization 5.2.4 reasonable security 5.3 permitted uses 5.3.1 frequency capping 5.3.2 financial logging 5.3.3 security 5.3.4 debugging 5.3.5 audience measurement 6. user-granted exceptions 7. interaction with existing user privacy controls 8. unknowing collection 9. legal compliance a. acknowledgements b. references b.1 normative references 1. scope do not track is designed to provide users with a simple preference expression mechanism to allow or limit online tracking globally or selectively. the specification applies to compliance with requests through user agents that 1 can access the general browsable web 2 have a user interface that satisfies the requirements in determining user preference in the tracking-dnt specification 3 and can implement all of the tracking-dnt specification including the mechanisms for communicating a tracking status and the user-granted exception mechanism. issue 209 description of scope of specification 2. definitions 2.1 user a user is an individual human. when user agent software accesses online resources whether or not the user understands or has specific knowledge of a particular request that request is made by the user. 2.2 user agent the term user agent refers to any of the various client programs capable of initiating http requests including but not limited to browsers spiders web-based robots command-line tools native applications and mobile apps http11 2.3 network interaction a network interaction is a single http request and its corresponding response s zero or more interim 1xx responses and a single final 2xx-5xx response. 2.4 user action a user action is a deliberate action by the user via configuration invocation or selection to initiate a network interaction. selection of a link submission of a form and reloading a page are examples of user actions. 2.5 subrequest a subrequest is any network interaction that is not directly initiated by user action. for example an initial response in a hypermedia format that contains embedded references to stylesheets images frame sources and onload actions will cause a browser depending on its capabilities and configuration to perform a corresponding set of automated subrequests to fetch those references using additional network interactions. 2.6 party a party is a natural person a legal entity or a set of legal entities that share common owner s common controller s and a group identity that is easily discoverable by a user. common branding or providing a list of affiliates that is available via a link from a resource where a party describes dnt practices are examples of ways to provide this discoverability. 2.7 service provider an outsourced service provider is considered to be the same party as its client if the service provider acts only as a data processor on behalf of the client ensures that the data can only be accessed and used as directed by that client has no independent right to use or share the data except as necessary to ensure the integrity security and correct operation of the service being provided and has a contract in place that outlines and mandates these requirements. issue 206 service provider name and requirements 2.8 first party with respect to a given user action a first party is a party with which the user intends to interact via one or more network interactions as a result of making that action. merely hovering over muting pausing or closing a given piece of content does not constitute a user s intent to interact with another party. in some cases a resource on the web will be jointly controlled by two or more distinct parties. each of those parties is considered a first party if a user would reasonably expect to communicate with all of them when accessing that resource. for example prominent co-branding on the resource might lead a user to expect that multiple parties are responsible for the content or functionality. 2.9 third party for any data collected as a result of one or more network interactions resulting from a user s action a third party is any party other than that user a first party for that user action or a service provider acting on behalf of either that user or that first party. 2.10 deidentified data is deidentified when a party has achieved a reasonable level of justified confidence that the data cannot be used to infer information about or otherwise be linked to a particular consumer computer or other device commits to make no attempt to re-identify the data and contractually prohibits downstream recipients from attempting to re-identify the data. issue 188 definition of de-identified or previously unlinkable data 2.11 tracking tracking is the collection of data regarding a particular user s activity across multiple distinct contexts and the retention use or sharing of data derived from that activity outside the context in which it occurred. a context is a set of resources that are controlled by the same party or jointly controlled by a set of parties. 2.12 collect use share facilitate a party collects data received in a network interaction if that data remains within the party s control after the network interaction is complete. a party uses data if the party processes the data for any purpose other than storage or merely forwarding it to another party. a party shares data if it transfers or provides a copy of data to any other party. a party facilitates any other party s collection of data if it enables such party to collect data and engage in tracking. 2.13 graduated response a graduated response a methodology where the action taken is proportional to the size of the problem or risk that is trying to be mitigated. in the context of this document the term is used to describe an increase in the collection of data about a user or interaction in response to a specific problem that a party has become aware of such as an increase in fraudulent activity originating from a particular network or ip address range resulting in increased logging of data relating to interactions from that specific range of ip addresses as opposed to increased logging for all users in general. note only used in security below and may overlap with the explanation there. delete the definition and let it be defined the only place it s used 3. user agent compliance issue 205 user agent compliance requirements connections to tpe note much of this is duplicative of requirements in the tracking-dnt specification. can we harmonize the two for example by removing this section and just including a normative reference and a summary of the requirements or by reducing this section to any requirements beyond those in tracking-dnt a user agent must offer users a minimum of two alternative choices for a do not track general preference unset or dnt 1. a user agent may offer a third alternative choice dnt 0. if the user s choice is dnt 1 or dnt 0 the tracking preference is enabled otherwise the tracking preference is not enabled. a user agent must have a default tracking preference of unset not enabled user agents and web sites are responsible for determining the user experience by which a tracking preference is controlled. user agents and web sites must ensure that tracking preference choices are communicated to users clearly and accurately and shown at the time and place the tracking preference choice is made available to a user. user agents and web sites must ensure that the tracking preference choices describe the parties to whom dnt applies and must make available brief and neutral explanatory text to provide more detailed information about dnt functionality. that text must indicate that if the tracking preference is communicated it limits collection and use of web viewing data for certain advertising and other purposes when dnt is enabled some data may still be collected and used for certain purposes and a description of such purposes and if a user affirmatively allows a particular party to collect and use data about web viewing activities enabling dnt will not limit collection and use from that party. user agents and web sites must obtain an explicit choice made by a user when setting controls that affect the tracking preference expression. a user agent must transmit the tracking preference according to the tracking-dnt specification. implementations of http that are not under control of the user must not generate or modify a tracking preference. 4. first party compliance with respect to a given user action a first party to that action which receives a dnt 1 signal may collect and use data received from those network interactions. this includes customizing content services and advertising with respect to those user actions. a first party to a given user action must not share data about those network interactions with third parties to that action who are prohibited from collecting data from those network interactions under this recommendation. data about the interaction may be shared withh service providers acting on behalf of the first party. a first party to a given user action may elect to follow the rules defined under this recommendation for third parties. note given wg decision on issue-241 how should a first party to an action indicate to the user that it is electing to follow third-party rules should we suggest using n or some other tracking status code issue 170 definition of and what whether limitations around data append and first parties 5. third party compliance issue 203 use of tracking in third-party compliance when a third party to a given user action receives a dnt 1 signal in a related network interaction that party must not collect share or use data related to that interaction that party must not use data about previous network interactions in which it was a third party. a third party to a given user action may nevertheless collect and use such data when a user has explicitly-granted an exception as described below data is collected for the set of permitted uses described below or the data is de-identified as defined in this recommendation. outside the permitted uses and explicitly-granted exceptions listed below a third party to a given user action must collect share or associate with related network interactions any identifiers that identify a specific user user agent or device. for example a third party that does not require unique user identifiers for one of the permitted uses must not place a unique identifier in cookies or other browser-based local storage mechanisms. a third party to a given user action that disregards a dnt signal must indicate so to the user agent using the response mechanism defined in the tracking-dnt recommendation. it is outside the scope of this specification to control short-term transient collection and use of data so long as the data is not shared with a third party and is not used to build a profile about a user or otherwise alter an individual user s user experience outside the current network interaction. for example the contextual customization of ads shown as part of the same network interaction is not restricted by a dnt 1 signal. issue 134 would we additionally permit logs that are retained for a short enough period issue 204 definitions of collection retention and transience network interaction 5.1 third party geolocation compliance if a third party to a given user action receives a dnt 1 signal in a related network interaction then that party must not use geolocation data in that interaction at any level more granular than postal code unless specific consent has been granted for the use of more granular location data. issue 202 limitations on geolocation by third parties 5.2 general principles for permitted uses some collection and use of data by third parties to a given user action is permitted notwithstanding receipt of dnt 1 in a network interaction as enumerated below. different permitted uses may differ in their permitted items of data collection retention times and consequences. in all cases collection and use of data must be reasonably necessary and proportionate to achieve the purpose for which it is specifically permitted unreasonable or disproportionate collection retention or use are not permitted uses 5.2.1 no secondary uses a party must not use data collected for permitted uses for purposes other than the permitted uses for which each datum was permitted to be collected. 5.2.2 data minimization retention and transparency data collected by a party for permitted uses must be limited to the data reasonably necessary for such permitted uses. such data must not be retained any longer than is proportionate to and reasonably necessary for such permitted uses. a party must provide public transparency of the time periods for which data collected for permitted uses are retained. the party may enumerate different retention periods for different permitted uses. data must not be used for a permitted use once the data retention period for that permitted use has expired. after there are no remaining permitted uses for given data the data must be deleted or de-identified. a party that collects data for a permitted use must make reasonable data minimization efforts to ensure that only the data necessary for the permitted use is retained and must not rely on unique identifiers if alternative solutions are reasonably available. issue 199 limitations on the use of unique identifiers issue 233 data minimization retention and transparency should we use minimized rather than limited in this section 5.2.3 no personalization a party that collects data for a permitted use must not use that data to alter a specific user s online experience based on multi-site activity except as specifically permitted below. 5.2.4 reasonable security a party that collects data for a permitted use must use reasonable technical and organizational safeguards to prevent further processing of data retained for permitted uses. while physical separation of data maintained for permitted uses is not required best practices should be in place to ensure technical controls ensure access limitations and information security. that party should ensure that the access and use of data retained for permitted uses is auditable. 5.3 permitted uses issue 211 should we specify retention periods extended with transparency for permitted uses 5.3.1 frequency capping regardless of the tracking preference expressed data may be collected retained and used to limit the number of times that a user sees a particular advertisement often called frequency capping as long as the data retained do not reveal the user s browsing history. a party must not construct profiles of users or user behaviors based on their ad frequency history or otherwise alter the user s experience. 5.3.2 financial logging regardless of the tracking preference expressed data may be collected and used for billing and auditing related to the current network interaction and concurrent transactions. this may include counting ad impressions to unique visitors verifying positioning and quality of ad impressions and auditing compliance with this and other standards. 5.3.3 security regardless of the tracking preference expressed data may be collected and used to the extent reasonably necessary to detect security incidents protect the service against malicious deceptive fraudulent or illegal activity and prosecute those responsible for such activity provided that such data is not used for operational behavior profiling or personalization beyond what is reasonably necessary to protect the service or institute a graduated response. when feasible a graduated response to a detected security incident is preferred over widespread data collection. an example would be recording all use from a given ip address range regardless of dnt signal if the party believes it is seeing a coordinated attack on its service such as click fraud from that ip address range. similarly if an attack shared some other identifiable fingerprint such as a combination of user agent and other protocol information the party could retain logs on all interactions matching that fingerprint until it can be determined that they are not associated with such an attack or such retention is no longer necessary to support prosecution. 5.3.4 debugging regardless of the tracking preference expressed data may be collected retained and used for debugging purposes to identify and repair errors that impair existing intended functionality. 5.3.5 audience measurement note note an open question for the group is whether or how audience measurement would be addressed see issue 25. issue 25 how is audience measurement adressed under dnt permitted use or otherwise 6. user-granted exceptions when a user sends a dnt 0 signal the user is expressing a preference for a personalized experience. this signal indicates explicit consent for data collection retention processing disclosure and use by the recipient of this signal to provide a personalized experience for the user. this recommendation places no restrictions on data collected from requests received with dnt 0. a party may engage in practices otherwise proscribed by this recommendation if the user has given explicit and informed consent. this consent may be obtained through the api defined in the companion tracking-dnt document or a party may obtain out of band consent to disregard a do not track preference using a different technology. if a party is relying on out of band consent to disregard a do not track preference the party must indicate this consent to the user agent as described in the companion tracking-dnt document. 7. interaction with existing user privacy controls multiple systems may be setting sending and receiving dnt and or opt-out signals at the same time. as a result it will be important to ensure industry and web browser vendors are on the same page with respect to honoring user choices in circumstances where mixed signals may be received. as a general principle more specific settings override less specific settings. no dnt signal no opt-out treat as dnt unset dnt 1 signal no opt-out treat as dnt 1 opt-out no dnt 1 signal treat as dnt 1 opt-out dnt user-granted exception treat as dnt 0 for that site dnt user-granted exception is honored issue 210 interaction with existing privacy controls issue 207 conditions for dis-regarding or not dnt signals 8. unknowing collection if a party learns that it possesses data in violation of this recommendation it must where reasonably feasible delete or de-identify that data at the earliest practical opportunity even if it was previously unaware of such information practices despite reasonable efforts to understand its information practices. issue 208 requirements on unknowing collection retention and use 9. legal compliance notwithstanding anything in this recommendation a party may collect use and share data required to comply with applicable laws regulations and judicial processes. a. acknowledgements this specification consists of input from many discussions within and around the w3c tracking protection working group along with written contributions from haakon flage bratsberg opera software amy colando microsoft corporation nick doty w3c roy t. fielding adobe yianni lagos future of privacy forum tom lowenthal mozilla ted leung the walt disney company jonathan mayer stanford university ninja marnau invited expert thomas roessler w3c matthias schunter ibm wendy seltzer w3c john m. simpson invited expert kevin g. smith adobe peter swire invited expert rob van eijk invited expert david wainberg network advertising initiative rigo wenning w3c and shane wiley yahoo the dnt header field is based on the original do not track submission by jonathan mayer stanford arvind narayanan stanford and sid stamm mozilla the dom api for navigatordonottrack is based on the web tracking protection submission by andy zeigler adrian bateman and eliot graff microsoft many thanks to robin berjon for respec.js. b. references b.1 normative references http11 r. fielding et al. hypertext transfer protocol http 1.1. june 1999. rfc. url http www.ietf.org rfc rfc2616.txt tracking-dnt roy t. fielding david singer. tracking preference expression dnt 24 april 2014. w3c last call working draft. url http www.w3.org tr tracking-dnt 