web design and applications w3c w3c standards participate membership about w3c site navigation standards web design and applications web architecture semantic web xml technology web of services web of devices browsers and authoring tools all standards and drafts about w3c standards skip w3c standards web design and applications web design and applications on this page technology topics news upcoming events and talks web design and applications involve the standards for building and rendering web pages including html css svg device apis and other technologies for web applications webapps this section also includes information on how to make pages accessible to people with disabilities wcag to internationalize them and make them work on mobile devices. html css html and css are the fundamental technologies for building web pages html html and xhtml for structure css for style and layout including webfonts. find resources for good web page design as well as helpful tools. javascript web apis standard apis for client-side web application development include those for geolocation xmlhttprequest and mobile widgets. w3c standards for document models the dom and technologies such as xbl allow content providers to create interactive documents through scripting. graphics w3c is the home of the widely deployed png raster format svg vector format and the canvas api. webcgm is a more specialized format used for example in the fields of automotive engineering aeronautics. audio and video some of the w3c formats that enable authoring audio and video presentations include html svg and smil for synchronization w3c is also working on a timed text format for captioning and other applications. accessibility w3c s web accessibility initiative wai has published web content accessibility guidelines wcag to help authors create content that is accessible to people with disabilities. wai-aria gives authors more tools to create accessible web applications by providing additional semantics about widgets and behaviors. internationalization w3c has a mission to design technology that works across cultures and languages. w3c standards such as html and xml are built on unicode for instance. in addition w3c has published guidance for authors related to language tags bi-directional bidi text and more. mobile web w3c promotes one web that is available on any device. w3c s mobile web best practices help authors understand how to create content that provides a reasonable experience on a wide variety of devices contexts and locations. privacy the web is a powerful tool for communications and transactions of all sorts. it is important to consider privacy and security implications of the web as part of technology design. learn more about tracking and web app security. math on the web mathematics and formula are used on the web for business reports education materials and scientific research. w3c s mathml enables mathematics to be served received and processed on the world wide web just as html has enabled this functionality for other types of content. news html5 on our way to recommendation 17 june 2014 from w3c html working group in 2012 the html working group chairs came up with a plan to progress html aka plan 2014 the plan has several objectives produce a w3c recommendation for html 5.0 before the end of 2014 as well as a w3c recommendation for html 5.1 before the end of 2016 use the candidate recommendation of html5 which started in december 2012 to focus the testing effort where it is appropriate use modularity to manage the size and complexity of the specifications. over the past 2 years we have continued to refine and improve the html 5.0 specification. the html working group receives and tracks proposals from a variety of people in the community most prominently from the whatwg. during the past 2 years the html5 editors have worked with the community to exchange ideas and thus avoid divergence among specifications. the html landscapelists the differences between various html specifications. the html working group today has 97,000 tests for html5. as part of satisfying the w3c process requirements for candidate recommendation we have tracked implementations of html5 features and test results today show that there are at least 2 implementations for 96.7 of the available tests. what about the other 3.3 those failures arise from how different browsers handle errors and the working group has concluded that these failures do not reflect differences in implementations that will significantly affect interoperability of real-world running code. following the test results we removed several features from html 5.0due to their lack of implementations and stability including the dialog element and scoped style sheet. those features remain in the draft html 5.1 specification for the time being. w3c would like to thank the community for helping to build this valuable test suite. the tests come from the test the web forward community effort and the contributors to the web-platform-tests github repository and we strongly encourage web developers to continue to contribute to the testing effort and help make the open web platform reliable. at the moment the html working group is specifically looking for additional html 5.0 tests related to media elements and page navigation. as planned given the substantive changes made to the document we re returning html 5.0 to last call. the scope of the expected feedback at this point is limited to changes that have taken place during the candidate recommendation phase and the deadline is 15 july 2014. once we have addressed the last call comments and finalize the test suite we expect to move the document to proposed recommendation in the fall. a few features may be removed from html 5.0 but kept in html 5.1 if we can t get enough implementations the datacue interface input type time drag and drop and the new ruby model. advancing html 5.0 towards recommendation status is just one step in advancing the open web platform a full-fledged programming environment for rich interactive cross-platform applications with html5 at its core. several groups are extending the html markup language including for responsive design performance accessibility or additional security purposes. the html working group the w3c technical architecture group and the web applications working group are looking to have an extensible web summit in the middle of september where we will discuss the future of html. we expect a formal announcement in early july. announcing the unicode standard version 7.0 17 june 2014 from internationalization activity blog w3cwebdesign version 7.0 of the unicode standardis now available adding 2,834 new characters. this latest version adds the new currency symbols for the russian ruble and azerbaijani manat approximately 250 emoji pictographic symbols many other symbols and 23 new lesser-used and historic scripts as well as character additions to many existing scripts. these additions extend support for written languages of north america china india other asian countries and africa. see the link above for full details. most of the new emoji characters derive from characters in long-standing and widespread use in wingdings and webdings fonts. major enhancements were made to the indic script properties. new property values were added to enable a more algorithmic approach to rendering indic scripts. these include properties for joining behavior new classes for numbers and a further division of the syllabic categories of viramas and rephas. with these enhancements the default rendering for newly added indic scripts can be significantly improved. unicode character properties were extended to the new characters. the old characters have enhancements to script and alphabetic properties and casing and line-breaking behavior. there were also nearly 3,000 new cantonese pronunciation entries as well as new or clarified stability policies for promoting interoperable implementations. two other important unicode specifications are maintained in synchrony with the unicode standard and have updates for version 7.0. these will be released at the same time uts 10 unicode collation algorithm the standard for sorting unicode text uts 46 unicode idna compatibility processing for processing of non-ascii urls idns workshop report summary of the ld4lt group kickoff lider roadmapping workshop 11 june 2014 from internationalization activity blog w3cwebdesign the lider project has published a report on the first linked data for language technology event which was held 21st march in alignment with the european data forum in athens. read the report. industry stakeholders from many areas localization publishing language technology applications etc. and key researchers from linked data and language technology discussed promises and challenges around linguistic linked data. the report summarizes all presentations and includes an initial list of use cases and requirements for linguistic linked data. this and the overall outcome of the event will feed into work of the ld4lt group see especially the ld4lt latest draft version of use cases and the field of multilingual linked data in general. the ld4lt group is part of the multilingualweb community learn more about related projects. last call draft published for encoding spec 06 june 2014 from internationalization activity blog w3cwebdesign a last call working draft of encodinghas been published. while encodings have been defined to some extent implementations have not always implemented them in the same way have not always used the same labels and often differ in dealing with undefined and former proprietary areas of encodings. this specification attempts to fill those gaps so that new implementations do not have to reverse engineer encoding implementations of the market leaders and existing implementations can converge. the body of this spec is an exact copy of the whatwg version as of the date of its publication intended to provide a stable reference for other specifications. we are hoping for people to review the specification and send comments about any technical areas that need attention see the status section for details please send comments by 1 july 2014. updates to two working group notes published 06 june 2014 from internationalization activity blog w3cwebdesign authoring html handling right-to-left scripts and authoring html language declarationshave both been updated to a new format that lists do s and don ts but points to existing or new articles for detailed information. this will significantly help in keeping the material up to date in the future as technology changes. the documents have also been thoroughly overhauled to reflect the latest changes and information on the first document provides advice to content authors using html markup and css style sheets about how to create pages for languages that use right-to-left scripts such as arabic hebrew persian thaana urdu etc. it explains how to create content in right-to-left scripts that builds on but goes beyond the unicode bidirectional algorithm as well as how to prepare content for localization into right-to-left scripts. the second helps content authors specify the language of content which is useful for a wide number of applications from linguistically-sensitive searching to applying language-specific display properties. in some cases the potential applications for language information are still waiting for implementations to catch up whereas in others it is a necessity today. adding markup for language information to content is something that can and should be done now and as content is first developed. if not it will be much more difficult to take advantage of any future developments. last week webrtc net neutrality html5 advertising defeats flash etc. 02 june 2014 from w3c html working group this is the 26 may 2 june 2014edition of a weekly digest of w3c news and trends that i prepare for the w3c membership and public-w3c-digest mailing list publicly archived this digest aggregates information about w3c and w3c technology from online media a snapshot of how w3c and its work is perceived in online media. w3c and html5 related twitter trends what was tweeted frequently or caught my attention. most recentfirst popularity is flagged with a figure number of times the same uris or tweet was quoted rted. 23 first public working drafts w3c html form http extensions w3c html json form submission 43 upcoming web.br 2014. confer ncia web w3c brasil 65 html5 html5 pok mon 447 puremarketing la publicidad html5 derrota a los tradicionales anuncios en flash html5 advertising defeats traditional ads in flash open web net neutrality quartz when net neutrality backfires chile just killed free access to wikipedia and facebook 30 may cnet bored by the net neutrality debate check it as a rap battle 26 may w3c in the press or blogs 7articles since the 26-may digest a selection follows. you may read all articles in our press clippingspage. light reading 2 june what webrtc means for telcos sd times 30 may sd times 100 the elements of success the register 29 may hello hello yes i m calling you on my web browser cio 28 may can digital rights management and the open web coexist one more week to feisgiltt learn about and contribute to the future of web and localization standards 28 may 2014 from internationalization activity blog w3cwebdesign on 4 june and as part of the localization world conference in dublin the feisgiltt event will again provide an opportunity to discuss latest developments around localization and multilingual web technologies. the event is sponsored by the lider project. highlights include updates about its 2.0 and xliff 2.0 and a session about usage scenarios for linguistic linked data in localization. speakers include kevin o donnell microsoft bryan schnabel tektronix yves savourel enlaso and many more. register nowto meet the key players around standards that will influence today s and future business. last week emotionml is a recommendation specifiction timbl at the webbys web cryptography etc. 28 may 2014 from w3c html working group this is the 19-26 may 2014edition of a weekly digest of w3c news and trends that i prepare for the w3c membership and public-w3c-digest mailing list publicly archived this digest aggregates information about w3c and w3c technology from online media a snapshot of how w3c and its work is perceived in online media. w3c and html5 related twitter trends what was tweeted frequently or caught my attention. most recentfirst popularity is flagged with a figure number of times the same uris or tweet was quoted rted. 82 specifiction experimenting with new ways of discussing standards with a discourse instance initiative of robin berjon 66 spec emotion markup language emotionml 1.0 is a w3c recommendation 616 techcrunch appgyver launches composer a drag-and-drop tool for building html5 apps 20 glyn moody upcoming workshop on web cryptography next steps 31 web cryptography api extractable keys buzgilla 31 yale creator of the world wide web timberners_lee receives honorary doctor of engineering technology. yale2014 w3c open web net neutrality webby awards 2014 sir tim berners-lee s remarks on the history and the future of the web including up to us. a plea for net neutrality 21 may 2014 w3c in the press or blogs 1article since the 19-may digest. you may read all articles in our press clippingspage. nytimes.com bits 21 may california urges websites to disclose online tracking last week mozilla implements eme draft charter of web payments interest group w3c advisory board election etc. 19 may 2014 from w3c html working group this is the 9-19 may 2014edition of a weekly digest of w3c news and trends that i prepare for the w3c membership and public-w3c-digest mailing list publicly archived this digest aggregates information about w3c and w3c technology from online media a snapshot of how w3c and its work is perceived in online media. w3c and html5 related twitter trends what was tweeted frequently or caught my attention. most recentfirst popularity is flagged with a figure number of times the same uris or tweet was quoted rted. 34 eme open letter on european commission about drm in html5 13 web payments first draft of future web payments interest group charter published 42 w3c ab boaz sender running for the w3c advisory board 4.7k event global accessibility awareness day. more results on gaad 928 eff can this web be saved mozilla accepts drm and we all lose 906 mozilla reconciling mozilla s mission and the w3c eme 15 w3c business group first draft of vehicle data interfaces published by automotive and web platform business group 66 css grid layout module level 1 generated content for paged media module drafts published open web net neutrality the verge the real battle for net neutrality just began 15 may 2014 adi robertson gizmodo so long open web mozilla accepts closed source drm and we all lose 15 may 2014 danny o brien eff boston globe fcc plan guts net neutrality open web needs protection 14 may 2014 w3c in the press or blogs 6articles since the previous digest all about mozilla implementing eme. you may read them in our press clippingspage. slides for the multilingualweb and lider workshops available 15 may 2014 from internationalization activity blog w3cwebdesign the slides from the multilingualweb workshop including several posters and the lider roadmapping workshopare now available for download. additional material videos of the presentations a workshop report and more will follow in the next weeks stay tuned. talks and appearances 2014-09-25 25 sep crafting user experience for the fastest growing web demographic older users by shawn henry webvisions chicago chicago il usa see also the full list of w3c talks and appearances. events 2014-08-27 27 aug 2014-08-30 30 aug the graphical web winchester england the conference has expanded this year to invite technical presentations about the implementation and usage of a number of technologies being developed at w3c such as svg canvas css and html5 audio video. see full list of w3c events. footer navigation navigation home standards participate membership about w3c contact w3c contact help and faq sponsor donate site map feedback w3c updates copyright 2013 w3c mit ercim keio beihang usage policies apply. 