web and tv w3c w3c standards participate membership about w3c site navigation web of devices voice browsing device independence and content adaptation multimodal access web and tv skip w3c standards web of devices web and tv web and tv on this page what is web and tv what are w3c s plans in 2011 learn more current status of specifications and groups contact tv is a mature but rapidly-changing market. with the advent of ip-based devices connected tvs are progressing at a fast pace and traditional tv broadcasting is quickly evolving into a more immersive experience where users can interact with rich applications that are at least partly based on web technologies. there is strong growth in the deployment of devices that integrate regular web technologies such as html css and svg coupled with various device apis. what is web and television there is huge potential for the future to create an interoperable platform where web and tv benefit from each other. for instance tv comes with quality of services requirements for video delivery that would benefit video delivery on the web e.g. through the introduction of http adaptive streaming mechanisms. similarly exposing additional functionalities to the web browser that are commonly found on tv such as trick mode replay fast rewind fast forward or channel control would facilitate the integration of web browsers within tv sets. due to its central position as a home device tv is the primary screen for many second-screen scenarios whereby a second device laptop mobile phone interacts with the tv set to enlarge the possibilities in terms of user interactions with the show that the user watches. this includes gaming shopping or synchronized browsing scenarios. see also previous work at w3c on web and tv between 1998 and 2002. learn more the web and tv interest group will discuss and document findings and useful material on his home page. the pages of the web and tv tokyo workshop and of the web and tv berlin workshop reference various proposals and discussions on potential web and tv standardization needs. current status of specifications learn more about the current status of specifications related to web and tv these w3c groups are working on the related specifications cascading style sheets css working group device apis working group web and tv interest group contacts kazuyuki ashimura ashimura@w3.org daniel davis ddavis@w3.org current status web and tv footer navigation navigation home standards participate membership about w3c contact w3c contact help and faq donate site map feedback w3c updates copyright 2013 w3c mit ercim keio beihang usage policies apply. 