web of devices w3c w3c standards participate membership about w3c site navigation standards web design and applications web architecture semantic web xml technology web of services web of devices browsers and authoring tools all standards and drafts about w3c standards skip w3c standards web of devices web of devices on this page technology topics news upcoming events and talks w3c is focusing on technologies to enable web access anywhere anytime using any device. this includes web access from mobile phones and other mobile devices as well as use of web technology in consumer electronics printers interactive television and even automobiles. mobile web w3c promotes one web that is available on any device. w3c s mobile web initiative helps ensure the best user experience on mobile devices taking into account device capabilities location and other context information. voice browsing the w3c speech interface framework is a suite of specifications e.g. voicexml integrating web technology and speech interaction. voicexml pls sisr srgs scxml and ccxml all contribute to the speech interface framework. device independence and content adaptation devices come in many shapes capabilities and sizes which define constraints on the content these devices can handle. device descriptions content transformation guidelines device apis and cc pp help developers to optimize the user experience. multimodal access increasingly interactions with devices doesn t only happen with a keyboard but also through voice touch and gestures. the w3c multimodal architecture and its components emma inkml allow developers to adapt applications to new interaction modes. web and tv with the advent of ip-based devices connected tvs are progressing at a fast pace and traditional tv broadcasting is quickly evolving into a more immersive experience where users can interact with rich applications that are at least partly based on web technologies. there is strong growth in the deployment of devices that integrate regular web technologies such as html css and svg coupled with various device apis. news announcing the unicode standard version 7.0 17 june 2014 from internationalization activity blog w3cwebofdevices version 7.0 of the unicode standardis now available adding 2,834 new characters. this latest version adds the new currency symbols for the russian ruble and azerbaijani manat approximately 250 emoji pictographic symbols many other symbols and 23 new lesser-used and historic scripts as well as character additions to many existing scripts. these additions extend support for written languages of north america china india other asian countries and africa. see the link above for full details. most of the new emoji characters derive from characters in long-standing and widespread use in wingdings and webdings fonts. major enhancements were made to the indic script properties. new property values were added to enable a more algorithmic approach to rendering indic scripts. these include properties for joining behavior new classes for numbers and a further division of the syllabic categories of viramas and rephas. with these enhancements the default rendering for newly added indic scripts can be significantly improved. unicode character properties were extended to the new characters. the old characters have enhancements to script and alphabetic properties and casing and line-breaking behavior. there were also nearly 3,000 new cantonese pronunciation entries as well as new or clarified stability policies for promoting interoperable implementations. two other important unicode specifications are maintained in synchrony with the unicode standard and have updates for version 7.0. these will be released at the same time uts 10 unicode collation algorithm the standard for sorting unicode text uts 46 unicode idna compatibility processing for processing of non-ascii urls idns last call draft published for encoding spec 06 june 2014 from internationalization activity blog w3cwebofdevices a last call working draft of encodinghas been published. while encodings have been defined to some extent implementations have not always implemented them in the same way have not always used the same labels and often differ in dealing with undefined and former proprietary areas of encodings. this specification attempts to fill those gaps so that new implementations do not have to reverse engineer encoding implementations of the market leaders and existing implementations can converge. the body of this spec is an exact copy of the whatwg version as of the date of its publication intended to provide a stable reference for other specifications. we are hoping for people to review the specification and send comments about any technical areas that need attention see the status section for details please send comments by 1 july 2014. one more week to feisgiltt learn about and contribute to the future of web and localization standards 28 may 2014 from internationalization activity blog w3cwebofdevices on 4 june and as part of the localization world conference in dublin the feisgiltt event will again provide an opportunity to discuss latest developments around localization and multilingual web technologies. the event is sponsored by the lider project. highlights include updates about its 2.0 and xliff 2.0 and a session about usage scenarios for linguistic linked data in localization. speakers include kevin o donnell microsoft bryan schnabel tektronix yves savourel enlaso and many more. register nowto meet the key players around standards that will influence today s and future business. slides for the multilingualweb and lider workshops available 15 may 2014 from internationalization activity blog w3cwebofdevices the slides from the multilingualweb workshop including several posters and the lider roadmapping workshopare now available for download. additional material videos of the presentations a workshop report and more will follow in the next weeks stay tuned. this week webbyawards celebrating web25 webcryptoapi lc comments eff do not track tool etc. 09 may 2014 from mobile web w3c w3c this is the 2-9 may 2014edition of a weekly digest of w3c news and trends that i prepare for the w3c membership and public-w3c-digest mailing list publicly archived this digest aggregates information about w3c and w3c technology from online media a snapshot of how w3c and its work is perceived in online media. w3c and html5 related twitter trends what was tweeted frequently or caught my attention. most recentfirst popularity is flagged with a figure number of times the same uris or tweet was quoted rted. 36 segu-info w3c realiza un penetration test y solicita el cambio de contrase as de sus usuarios w3c performs a penetration test and requests the change of user passwords 149 eff international day against drm whatever happened to the w3c 34 thewebbyawards we re celebrating 25 years of the web with webfoundation and w3c. visit our 25 for 25 project http www.webat25.org thewebbyawards web25 33 webcryptoapi last call comments from akamai s principal security engineer rich salz 51 w3c web and mobile interest group standards for web applications on mobile current state and roadmap april 2014 228 sitepoint using device orientation in html5 1.1k eff help eff test privacy badger our new tool to stop creepy online tracking open web net rights webat25.org uk s southbank centre unveils web we want festival in celebration of web25 8 may 2014 the verge huge coalition led by amazon microsoft and others take a stand against fcc on net neutrality 7 may 2014 ars technica mozilla offers fcc a net neutrality plan with a twist 5 may 2014 mozilla starting may 12th 2014 learn creative ways to teach web literacy digital skills and open practices 1 may 2014 w3c in the press or blogs 18articles since the previous digest. a selection follows. find keywords on our press clippings. zdnet 8 may should cloud services treat a million end-user devices equally data guidance 8 may usa w3c s huge milestone on dnt moves to last call status huffington post the world post 6 may we need a magna carta for the internet idg news 2 may yahoo drops do not track policy in favor of personalized experience adweek 29 april ad industry will soon unveil a do not track browser solution mediapost daily online examiner 25 april web standards group moves forward with do-not-track effort cihan 24 april brazil s internet move globally acclaimed multilingualweb workshop 7-8 may follow via live stream 06 may 2014 from internationalization activity blog w3cwebofdevices the multilingualweb workshop on 7-8 may will be streamed live follow the event online if you cannot make it to madrid. for details about speakers and presentations see the workshop program the workshop is supported by the lider project and sponsored by verisign and lionbridge. program published for w3c multilingualweb workshop in madrid 7-8 may 11 april 2014 from internationalization activity blog w3cwebofdevices see the program.the keynote speaker will be alolita sharma director of language engineering from the wikimedia foundation. she is followed by a strong line up in sessions entitled developers creators localizers machines and users including speakers from microsoft wikimedia foundation the un fao w3c yandex sdl lionbridge asia pacific tld verisign dfki and many more. on the afternoon of the second day we will hold open space breakout discussions. abstracts and details about an additional poster session will be provided shortly. the program will also feature an ld4lt event on may 8-9 focusing on text analytics and the usefulness of wikipedia and dbpedia for multiilngual text and content analytics and on language resources and aspects of converting selected types of language resources into rdf. participation in both events is free. see the call for participation for details about how to register for the multilingualweb workshop. the ld4lt event requires a separate registrationand you have the opportunity to submit position statements about language resources and rdf. if you haven t registered yet note that space is limited so please be sure to register soon to ensure that you get a place. the multilingualweb workshops funded by the european commission and coordinated by the w3c look at best practices and standards related to all aspects of creating localizing and deploying the multilingual web. the workshops are successful because they attract a wide range of participants from fields such as localization language technology browser development content authoring and tool development etc. to create a holistic view of the interoperability needs of the multilingual web. we look forward to seeing you in madrid this week w3c annotations workshop webrtc summit net neutrality in europe etc. 04 april 2014 from mobile web w3c w3c this is the 28 march 4 april 2014edition of a weekly digest of w3c news and trends that i prepare for the w3c membership and public-w3c-digest mailing list publicly archived this digest aggregates information about w3c and w3c technology from online media a snapshot of how w3c and its work is perceived in online media. w3c and html5 related twitter trends nothing stood out particularly this week i noted a few mentions of w3c annotations workshop jats-con where liam quin presented publishing in style with xml webrtc global summit where dominique haza l-massieux keynoted webrtc web meet communications w3c tag face-to-face meeting and extensible web summit held today net neutrality open web forbes the eu outpaces the u.s. on net neutrality 4 april 2014 gigaom european parliament passes strong net neutrality law along with major roaming reforms 3 april 2014 chris marsden commissioner kroes can skype her grandchildren s mobiles in retirement 3 april 2014 w3c in the press or blogs 6articles this week. a selection follows. read more and find keywords on our press clippings. it world 3 april web developers less concerned about browser-compatibility more concerned with html5 computer world 2 april ad tracking is anything being done it world 31 march accessible technology professionals will soon be able to get certified microfinance monitor 29 march how www world wide web was born at cern 25 years ago speaker deadline for madrid multilingualweb workshop is friday march 14 05 march 2014 from internationalization activity blog w3cwebofdevices we would like to remind you that the deadline for speaker proposals for the 7th multilingualweb workshop may 7 8 2014 madrid spain is on friday march 14 at 23 59 utc. featuring a keynote by alolita sharma director of engineering wikipedia and breakout sessions on linked open data and other critical topics this workshop will focus on the advances and challenges faced in making the web truly multilingual. it provides an outstanding and influential forum for thought leaders to share their ideas and gain critical feedback. while the organizers have already received many excellent submissions there is still time to make a proposal and we encourage interested parties to do so by the deadline. with roughly 200 attendees anticipated for the workshop from a wide variety of profiles we are certain to have a large and diverse audience that can provide constructive and useful feedback with stimulating discussion about all of the presentations. for more information and to register please visit the madrid workshop call for participation. this week at w3c open data promotion in japan rdf is 15 and rdf 1.1 became a rec microsoft to implement webdriver etc. 28 february 2014 from mobile web w3c w3c this is the 21-28 february 2014edition of a weekly digest of w3c news and trends that i prepare for the w3c membership and public-w3c-digest mailing list publicly archived this digest aggregates information about w3c and w3c technology from online media a snapshot of how w3c and its work is perceived in online media. w3c and html5 buzz in twitter what was tweeted frequently or caught my attention. most recentfirst popularity is flagged with a figure number of times the same uris or tweet was quoted rted. 111 itmedia japan sabae city leads open data promotion in 24 japanese cities and first member of local government to join w3c. 48 browser testing tools wg meeting microsoft to ship a webdriver implementation from ie 11+ 50 spec rdf 1.1 is a w3c recommendation 29 mwc14 html5 we are a believer picture of w3c booth 200 mwc14 mozilla signs a deal to make the world s cheapest smartphone 25 firefox os devicewith 3.5 screen and html5 apps 33 mwc14 w3c at mobile world congress booth 8.1g15 14 celebration 15th anniversary of rdf 148 mozilla wanted awesome html5 app ports for firefox os the open web a net neutrality open web knight foundation toward a stronger internet 27 february 2014 gigaom europe s net neutrality law gets breathing space as industry committee delays vote 25 february 2014 gigaom marc andreessen says more net neutrality laws are not the answer 24 february 2014 reuters netflix to pay comcast for faster speeds 24 february 2014 w3c in the press or blogs 10articles this week. find keywords on our press clippings. circleid 26 february papers now available publicly for w3c iab strengthening the internet workshop heise online 26 february w3c aktualisiert metadatenformat rdf w3c updated rdf metadata format the telegraph 25 february 25 years of the world wide web 25 web superstars genbeta 25 february qu ha sido de html5 what has become of html5 the register 25 february evil or benign trusted proxy draft debate rages on faro de vigo 25 february mwc14 gallegos en la meca sundial de la tecnolog a mwc14 galician in the world mecca of technology zdnet 24 february servo inside mozilla s mission to reinvent the web browser for the multi-core age phonearena.com 23 february mozilla signs a deal to make the world s cheapest smartphone firefox os device with 3.5 screen and html5 apps la stampa 21 february il future della governance di internet post datagate il brasile d l esempio the future of internet governance after datagate brazil leads the way talks and appearances none. see full list of w3c talks and appearances. events 2014-06-25 25 jun 2014-06-26 26 jun workshop on the web of things berlin germany hosted by siemens participants in this workshop will examine the potential for open standards as a basis for services either between devices at the network edge e.g. in home hubs or in the cloud. they will discuss the use of web protocols and scripting languages for implementing services the need for apis for implementing drivers for specific iot technologies a shared approach to describing services as a basis for interoperability and the underlying use of http coap web sockets and exi json for restful services. see full list of w3c events. footer navigation navigation home standards participate membership about w3c contact w3c contact help and faq donate site map feedback w3c updates copyright 2013 w3c mit ercim keio beihang usage policies apply. 