world wide web consortium w3c w3c w3c by region all australia sterreich austria belgi belgium botswana brasil brazil 中国 china suomi finland deutschland germany greece france magyarorsz g hungary india ire ireland israel italia italy に ほ ん japan 한 국 korea lesotho l tzebuerg luxembourg morocco namibia nederland netherlands russia s n gal espa a spain south africa swatini swaziland sverige sweden united kingdom standards participate membership about w3c site navigation standards web design and applications web architecture semantic web xml technology web of services web of devices browsers and authoring tools or view all web and industry web of data digital publishing mobile web tv and broadcasting web for all accessibility internationalization w3c a to z community and business groups current groups proposed groups working groups specifications by group participant guidebook dev resources w3conf more ways to participate member-only home join a group get member account skip news w3c announces program opens registration for 20th anniversary symposium 18 june 2014 archive w3c today announced the program and opened registration for w3c20 anniversary symposium the future of the web which takes place 29 october in santa clara california. confirmed speakers are tim berners-lee inventor of the web and w3c director vinton cerf vice president and chief internet evangelist at google fadi chehad chief executive officer of icann david-michel davies executive director the webby awards the international academy of digital arts sciences di-ann eisnor head of platforms and partnerships community geographer at waze sue gardner executive director of the wikimedia foundation alberto ibarg en president and ceo knight foundation jun murai dean and professor at keio university sandy pentland professor of media arts and sciences at mit lee rainie director of the pew research center s internet american life project anders wahlquist ceo and founding partner of b-reel please join tim berners-lee and other global strategists business leaders and developers for an exciting afternoon of insights and discussion about how to keep the web strong followed by a gala dinner. w3c will also live stream the symposium. w3c20 is made possible by the generosity of sponsors intel platinum icann silver and the john s. and james l. knight foundation silver registration is open to the public for a limited number of seats. read the full media advisory and follow us in social media with w3c20. w3c invites implementations of linked data platform 1.0 19 june 2014 archive the linked data platform ldp working group invites implementation of the candidate recommendation of linked data platform 1.0. this document describes a set of best practices and simple approach for a read-write linked data architecture based on http access to web resources that describe their state using the rdf data model. learn more about the data activity. last call vibration api ambient light events html media capture 19 june 2014 archive the device apis working group has published three last call working drafts today vibration api. this specification defines an api that provides access to the vibration mechanism of the hosting device. vibration is a form of tactile feedback. ambient light events. this specification defines a means to receive events that correspond to a light sensor detecting the presence of a light. html media capture. the html media capture specification defines an html form extension that facilitates user access to a device s media capture mechanism such as a camera or microphone from within a file upload control. comments on these three specifications are welcome through 24 july 2014. learn more about the ubiquitous web applications activity. w3c invites implementations of dom parsing and serialization 17 june 2014 archive the web applications working group invites implementation of the candidate recommendation of dom parsing and serialization. this specification defines various apis for programmatic access to html and generic xml parsers by web applications for use in parsing and serializing dom nodes. the group also published a working draft of shadow dom. this specification describes a method of combining multiple dom trees into one hierarchy and how these trees interact with each other within a document thus enabling better composition of the dom. learn more about the rich web client activity. last call html5 17 june 2014 archive the html working group has published a last call working draft of html5. this specification defines the 5th major revision of the core language of the world wide web the hypertext markup language html in this version new features are introduced to help web application authors new elements are introduced based on research into prevailing authoring practices and special attention has been given to defining clear conformance criteria for user agents in an effort to improve interoperability. comments are welcome through 15 july 2014. the group also published a working draft of html 5.1. html was primarily designed as a language for semantically describing scientific documents although its general design and adaptations over the years have enabled it to be used to describe a number of other types of documents. the main area that has not been adequately addressed by html is a vague subject referred to as web applications. this standard attempts to rectify this while at the same time updating the html language to address issues raised in the past few years. learn more about the html activity. core accessibility api mappings 1.1 core-aam first public working draft and wai-aria 1.1 updated working draft 12 june 2014 archive the protocols and formats working group today published a first public working draft of core accessibility api mappings 1.1 core-aam which supports the updated working draft of accessible rich internet applications wai-aria 1.1. wai-aria provides an ontology of roles states and properties that define accessible user interface elements. wai-aria is designed to improve the accessibility and interoperability of web content particularly web applications. core-aam describes how user agents should expose semantics of content languages to accessibility apis across multiple content technologies including much of wai-aria core-aam serves as the basis for other specifications to extend the mappings to specific technologies. learn more from the call for review e-mail and read about the web accessibility initiative wai three specifications published by the web applications working group 12 june 2014 archive the web applications working group has published three documents today a first public working draft of dom level 3 keyboardevent key values. this specification defines the values for the keyboardevent.key attribute which is defined as part of the document object model dom level 3 events specification. the key attribute contains information about the character generated by the key event. a first public working draft of dom level 3 keyboardevent code values. this specification defines the values for the keyboardevent.code attribute which is defined as part of the document object model dom level 3 events specification. the code value contains information about the key event that can use used identify the physical key being pressed by the user. a working draft of ui events. this specification extends the events and features defined in dom events level 3. learn more about the rich web client activity. more news talks and appearances 2014-06-28 28 jun two futures keynote by charles mccathienevile mobile optimized developers&#039 conference minsk belarus 2014-08-20 20 aug develop multimodal applications with free and open source tools by deborah dahl speechtek 2014 new york usa 2014-09-04 4 sep building the web of data keynote by phil archer semantics leipzig germany 2014-09-25 25 sep crafting user experience for the fastest growing web demographic older users by shawn henry webvisions chicago chicago il usa events 2014-06-25 25 jun 2014-06-26 26 jun workshop on the web of things berlin germany hosted by siemens 2014-06-30 30 jun 2014-07-01 1 jul uses of open data within government for innovation and efficiency samos greece co-located with the 5th samos summit on ict-enabled governance 2014-08-17 17 aug 2014-08-19 19 aug ruleml-2014 prague czech republic co-located with ecai 2014 2014-08-27 27 aug 2014-08-30 30 aug the graphical web winchester england 2014-09-10 10 sep 2014-09-11 11 sep workshop on web cryptography next steps mountain view usa hosted by microsoft sponsored by google and tyfone 2014-10-27 27 oct 2014-10-31 31 oct tpac 2014 santa clara california 2014-10-29 29 oct w3c20 santa clara ca the world wide web consortium w3c is an international community that develops open standards to ensure the long-term growth of the web. read about the w3c mission. privacy policy update planned w3c plans to update its site privacy policy shortly after 14 april. no material changes are intended in the new privacy policy. w3c blog html5 on our way to recommendation 17 june 2014 by philippe le hegaret last week webrtc net neutrality html5 advertising defeats flash etc. 2 june 2014 by coralie mercier last week emotionml is a recommendation specifiction timbl at the webbys web cryptography etc. 28 may 2014 by coralie mercier validators more software more validators unicorn html css w3c cheatsheet more open source software web and w3c anniversaries w3c director tim berners-lee invented the web 25 years ago. learn about activities all year long including w3c s 20th anniversary symposium. thanks to our anniversary sponsors many thanks to anniversary sponsors intel platinum icann silver and the john s. and james l. knight foundation silver w3c member testimonial fujitsu limited fujitsu is a leading provider of it-based business solutions for the global marketplace. fujitsu is actively promoting standardization of xml electronic businesses web services and cloud computing related technologies. it supports many w3c specifications in its products and services. footer navigation navigation home standards participate membership about w3c contact w3c contact help and faq sponsor donate site map feedback w3c updates copyright 2014 w3c mit ercim keio beihang usage policies apply. 