xhtml basic 1.1 second edition xhtml basic 1.1 second edition w3c recommendation 23 november 2010 this version http www.w3.org tr 2010 rec-xhtml-basic-20101123 latest version http www.w3.org tr xhtml-basic previous version http www.w3.org tr 2010 per-xhtml-basic-20101007 diff-marked from previous version xhtml-basic-diff.html previous recommendation http www.w3.org tr 2008 rec-xhtml-basic-20080729 diff-marked from previous version xhtml-basic-rec-diff.html editor shane mccarron applied testing and technology inc. shane@aptest.com version 1.1 editors shane mccarron applied testing and technology inc. masayasu ishikawa until march 2007 while at w3c version 1.0 editors mark baker sun microsystems masayasu ishikawa until march 2007 while at w3c shinichi matsui panasonic peter stark ericsson ted wugofski openwave systems toshihiko yamakami access co. ltd. please refer to the errata for this document which may include some normative corrections. see also translations. this document is also available in these non-normative formats postscript version pdf version zip archive and gzip d tar archive. copyright 2007-2010 w3c mit ercim keio all rights reserved. w3c liability trademark and document use rules apply. abstract the xhtml basic document type includes the minimal set of modules required to be an xhtml host language document type and in addition it includes images forms basic tables and object support. it is designed for web clients that do not support the full set of xhtml features for example web clients such as mobile phones pdas pagers and set top boxes. the document type is rich enough for content authoring. xhtml basic is designed as a common base that may be extended. the goal of xhtml basic is to serve as a common language supported by various kinds of user agents. this revision 1.1 second edition supercedes version 1.1 as defined in http www.w3.org tr 2008 rec-xhtml-basic-20080729. in this revision an xml schema implementation and the lang attribute have been added. in the update from version 1.0 to version 1.1 several new features were incorporated into the language in order to better serve the small-device community that is this language s major user xhtml forms defined in xhtmlmod intrinsic events defined in xhtmlmod the value attribute for the li element defined in xhtmlmod the target attribute defined in xhtmlmod the style element defined in xhtmlmod the style attribute defined in xhtmlmod xhtml presentation module defined in xhtmlmod the inputmode attribute defined in section 5 of this document the document type definition is implemented using xhtml modules as defined in xhtml modularization xhtmlmod status of this document this section describes the status of this document at the time of its publication. other documents may supersede this document. a list of current w3c publications and the latest revision of this technical report can be found in the w3c technical reports index at http www.w3.org tr this document is a w3c recommendation and supersedes the 29 july 2008 version of the xhtml basic recommendation. it reflects cross-industry agreement on a set of markup language features that allows authors to create rich web content deliverable to a wide range of devices. the only changes in this version are to add an xml schema implementation of the markup language and integrate the lang attribute to increase compatibility with user agents and assistive technologies. a version that shows the specific changes from the previous recommendation is available in diff-marked form. this document has been produced by the w3c xhtml2 working group as part of the w3c html activity. please see the working group s implementation report. please send comments about this document to www-html-editor@w3.org archive it is inappropriate to send discussion email to this address. public discussion may take place on www-html@w3.org archive this document has been reviewed by w3c members by software developers and by other w3c groups and interested parties and is endorsed by the director as a w3c recommendation. it is a stable document and may be used as reference material or cited from another document. w3c s role in making the recommendation is to draw attention to the specification and to promote its widespread deployment. this enhances the functionality and interoperability of the web. this document was produced by a group operating under the 5 february 2004 w3c patent policy. w3c maintains a public list of any patent disclosures made in connection with the deliverables of the group that page also includes instructions for disclosing a patent. an individual who has actual knowledge of a patent which the individual believes contains essential claim s must disclose the information in accordance with section 6 of the w3c patent policy. table of contents 1. introduction 1.1. xhtml for small information appliances 1.2. background and requirements 1.3. design rationale 2. conformance 2.1. document conformance 2.2. user agent conformance 3. the xhtml basic document type 4. how to use xhtml basic 5. xhtml inputmode module 5.1. inputmode attribute value syntax 5.2. user agent behavior 5.3. list of tokens 5.4. relationship to xml schema pattern facets 5.5. examples 6. acknowledgements a. references a.1. normative references a.2. informative references b. xhtml basic document type definition b.1. sgml open catalog entry for xhtml basic b.2. xhtml basic driver b.3. xhtml basic customizations c. xhtml basic xml schema definition c.1. xhtml basic xml schema driver c.2. xhtml basic schema modules c.3. xhtml basic customizations 1. introduction 1.1. xhtml for small information appliances html 4 is a powerful language for authoring web content but its design does not take into consideration issues pertinent to small devices including the implementation cost in power memory etc. of the full feature set. consumer devices with limited resources cannot generally afford to implement the full feature set of html 4. requiring a full-fledged computer for access to the world wide web excludes a large portion of the population from consumer device access of online information and services. because there are many ways to subset html there are many almost identical subsets defined by organizations and companies. without a common base set of features developing applications for a wide range of web clients is difficult. the motivation for xhtml basic is to provide an xhtml document type that can be shared across communities e.g. desktop tv and mobile phones and that is rich enough to be used for simple content authoring. new community-wide document types can be defined by extending xhtml basic in such a way that xhtml basic documents are in the set of valid documents of the new document type. thus an xhtml basic document can be presented on the maximum number of web clients. the document type definition for xhtml basic is implemented based on the xhtml modules defined in xhtml modularization xhtmlmod for information on best practices for mobile content we refer you to mobilebp 1.2. background and requirements information appliances are targeted for particular uses. they support the features they need for the functions they are designed to fulfill. the following are examples of different information appliances mobile phones televisions pdas vending machines pagers car navigation systems mobile game machines digital book readers smart watches existing subsets and variants of html for these clients include compact html chtml the wireless markup language wml and the html 4.0 guidelines for mobile access guidelines the common features found in these document types include basic text including headings paragraphs and lists hyperlinks and links to related documents basic forms basic tables images meta information this set of html features has been the starting point for the design of xhtml basic. since many content developers are familiar with these html features they comprise a useful host language that may be combined with markup modules from other languages according to the methods described in xhtml modularization xhtmlmod for example xhtml basic may be extended with a custom module to support richer markup semantics in specific environments. it is not the intention of xhtml basic to limit the functionality of future languages. but since the features in html 4 frames advanced tables etc. were developed for a desktop computer type of client they have proved to be inappropriate for many non-desktop devices. xhtml basic will be extended and built upon. extending xhtml from a common and basic set of features instead of almost identical subsets or the too-large set of functions in html 4 will be good for interoperability on the web as well as for scalability. compared to the rich functionality of html 4 xhtml basic may look like one step back but in fact it is two steps forward for clients that do not need what is in html 4 and for content developers who get one xhtml subset instead of many. 1.3. design rationale this section explains why certain html features are not part of xhtml basic. 1.3.1. presentation many simple web clients cannot display fonts other than monospace. bi-directional text bold faced font and other text extension elements are not supported. it is recommended that style sheets be used to create a presentation that is appropriate for the device. 1.3.2. tables basic xhtml tables xhtmlmod section 5.6.1 are supported but tables can be difficult to display on small devices. it is recommended that content developers follow the web content accessibility guidelines 1.0 for creating accessible tables wcag10 guideline 5 note that in the basic tables module nesting of tables is prohibited. 1.3.3. frames frames are not supported. frames depend on a screen interface and may not be applicable to some small appliances like phones pagers and watches. 2. conformance this section is normative. 2.1. document conformance a conforming xhtml basic document is a document that requires only the facilities described as mandatory in this specification. such a document must meet all of the following criteria the document must conform to the constraints expressed in appendix b and appendix c the root element of the document must be html the name of the default namespace on the root element must be the xhtml namespace name http www.w3.org 1999 xhtml. the start tag may also contain the declaration of the xml schema instance namespace and an xml schema instance schemalocation attribute xmlschema such an attribute would associate the xhtml namespace http www.w3.org 1999 xhtml with the xml schema at the uri http www.w3.org markup schema xhtml-basic11.xsd. there must be a doctype declaration in the document prior to the root element. if present the public identifier included in the doctype declaration must reference the dtd found in appendix b using its formal public identifier. the system identifier may be modified appropriately. doctype html public w3c dtd xhtml basic 1.1 en http www.w3.org tr xhtml-basic xhtml-basic11.dtd the dtd subset must not be used to override any parameter entities in the dtd. xhtml basic 1.1 documents should be labeled with the internet media type application xhtml+xml as defined in rfc3236 for further information on using media types with xhtml see the informative note xhtmlmime 2.2. user agent conformance the user agent must conform to the user agent conformance section of the xhtml 1.0 specification xhtml1 section 3.2 3. the xhtml basic document type this section is normative. the xhtml basic document type is defined as a set of xhtml modules. all xhtml modules are defined in the xhtml modularization specification xhtmlmod xhtml basic consists of the following xhtml modules structure module body head html title text module abbr acronym address blockquote br cite code dfn div em h1 h2 h3 h4 h5 h6 kbd p pre q samp span strong var hypertext module a list module dl dt dd ol ul li forms module button fieldset form input label legend select optgroup option textarea basic tables module caption table td th tr image module img object module object param presentation module b big hr i small sub sup tt metainformation module meta link module link base module base intrinsic events module events attributes scripting module script and noscript elements stylesheet module style element style attribute module deprecated style attribute target module target attribute. note the target attribute is designed to be a general hook for binding to an external environment such as frames multiple windows browser-tabbed windows when there is no such external environment bound to the user agent the user agent can ignore the target attribute. when there is an external environment bound the conformance requirements for the target attribute are defined in each environment. the content author needs to be aware that the user agent behavior for the target attribute depends on multiple factors such as the existence of an environment binding restrictions of available resources existence of other applications and user preferences such as pop-up blockers and implementation-dependent design decisions. when there is no external environmental conformance it is recommended that authors do not depend on use of the target attribute. it should be noted that any implementation-dependent use of the target attribute might impede interoperability. this specification also adds the lang attribute to the i18n attribute collection as defined in xhtmlmod. the lang attribute is defined in html4. when this attribute and the xml lang attribute are specified on the same element the xml lang attribute takes precedence. when both lang and xml lang are specified on the same element they should have the same value. this module is a required xhtml host language module. xhtml basic also uses the xhtml inputmode attribute module as defined in this specification. this module adds the inputmode attribute to the input and textarea elements of the xhtml forms module. finally xhtml basic adds the value attribute to the li element of the xhtml list module. an xml 1.0 dtd is available in appendix b. an xml schema implementation is available in appendix c. 4. how to use xhtml basic although xhtml basic can be used as it is a simple xhtml language with text links and images the intention of its simple design is for use as a host language. a host language can contain a mix of vocabularies all rolled into one document type. it is natural that xhtml is the host language since that is what most web developers are used to. when markup from other languages is added to xhtml basic the resulting document type will be an extension of xhtml basic. content developers can develop for xhtml basic or take advantage of the extensions. the goal of xhtml basic is to serve as a common language supported by various kinds of user agents. 5. xhtml inputmode attribute module this section is normative. this section was originally a component of xforms 1.0 and was written by martin duerst. the inputmode attribute module defines the inputmode attribute. inputmode cdata this attribute specifies style information for the current element. the following table shows additional attributes for elements defined elsewhere when the inputmode module is selected. elements attributes notes input& inputmode cdata when the basic forms or forms module is selected. textarea& inputmode cdata when the basic forms or forms module is selected. the attribute inputmode provides a hint to the user agent to select an appropriate input mode for the text input expected in an associated form control. the input mode may be a keyboard configuration an input method editor also called front end processor or any other setting affecting input on the device s used. using inputmode the author can give hints to the agent that make form input easier for the user. authors should provide inputmode attributes wherever possible making sure that the values used cover a wide range of devices. 5.1 inputmode attribute value syntax the value of the inputmode attribute is a white space separated list of tokens. tokens are either sequences of alphabetic letters or absolute uris. the later can be distinguished from the former by noting that absolute uris contain a tokens are case-sensitive. all the tokens consisting of alphabetic letters only are defined in this specification in 5.3 list of tokens or a successor of this specification this specification does not define any uris for use as tokens but allows others to define such uris for extensibility. this may become necessary for devices with input modes that cannot be covered by the tokens provided here. the uri should dereference to a human-readable description of the input mode associated with the use of the uri as a token. this description should describe the input mode indicated by this token and whether and how this token modifies other tokens or is modified by other tokens. 5.2 user agent behavior upon entering an empty form control with an inputmode attribute the user agent should select the input mode indicated by the inputmode attribute value. user agents should not use the inputmode attribute to set the input mode when entering a form control with text already present. to set the appropriate input mode when entering a form control that already contains text user agents should rely on platform-specific conventions. user agents should make available all the input modes which are supported by the operating system device s they run on have access to and which are installed for regular use by the user. this is typically only a small subset of the input modes that can be described with the tokens defined here. note additional guidelines for user agent implementation are found at uaag 1.0 the following simple algorithm is used to define how user agents match the values of an inputmode attribute to the input modes they can provide. this algorithm does not have to be implemented directly user agents just have to behave as if they used it. the algorithm is not designed to produce obvious or desirable results for every possible combination of tokens but to produce correct behavior for frequent token combinations and predictable behavior in all cases. first each of the input modes available is represented by one or more lists of tokens. an input mode may correspond to more than one list of tokens as an example on a system set up for a greek user both greek uppercase and user uppercase would correspond to the same input mode. no two lists will be the same. second the inputmode attribute is scanned from front to back. for each token t in the inputmode attribute if in the remaining lists of tokens representing available input modes there is any list of tokens that contains t then all lists of tokens representing available input modes that do not contain t are removed. if there is no remaining list of tokens that contains t then t is ignored. third if one or more lists of tokens are left and they all correspond to the same input mode then this input mode is chosen. if no list is left meaning that there was none at the start or if the remaining lists correspond to more than one input mode then no input mode is chosen. example assume the list of lists of tokens representing the available input modes is cyrillic uppercase cyrillic lowercase cyrillic latin user uppercase user lowercase then the following inputmode values select the following input modes cyrillic title selects cyrillic cyrillic lowercase selects cyrillic lowercase lowercase cyrillic selects cyrillic lowercase latin uppercase selects latin but uppercase latin does select cyrillic uppercase or user uppercase if they correspond to the same input mode and does not select any input mode if cyrillic uppercase and user uppercase do not correspond to the same input mode. 5.3 list of tokens tokens defined in this specification are separated into two categories script tokens and modifiers. in inputmode attributes script tokens should always be listed before modifiers. 5.3.1 script tokens script tokens provide a general indication the set of characters that is covered by an input mode. in most cases script tokens correspond directly to unicode scripts some tokens correspond to the block names in java class java.lang.character.unicodeblock java unicode blocks or unicode block names. however this neither means that an input mode has to allow input for all the characters in the script or block nor that an input mode is limited to only characters from that specific script. as an example a latin keyboard doesn t cover all the characters in the latin script and includes punctuation which is not assigned to the latin script. the version of the unicode standard that these script names are taken from is 3.2. input mode token comments arabic unicode script name armenian unicode script name bengali unicode script name bopomofo unicode script name braille used to input braille patterns not to indicate a braille input device buhid unicode script name canadianaboriginal unicode script name cherokee unicode script name cyrillic unicode script name deseret unicode script name devanagari unicode script name ethiopic unicode script name georgian unicode script name greek unicode script name gothic unicode script name gujarati unicode script name gurmukhi unicode script name han unicode script name hangul unicode script name hanja subset of han used in writing korean hanunoo unicode script name hebrew unicode script name hiragana unicode script name may include other japanese scripts produced by conversion from hiragana ipa international phonetic alphabet kanji subset of han used in writing japanese kannada unicode script name katakana unicode script name full-width not half-width khmer unicode script name lao unicode script name latin unicode script name malayalam unicode script name math mathematical symbols and related characters mongolian unicode script name myanmar unicode script name ogham unicode script name olditalic unico de script name oriya unicode script name runic unicode script name simplifiedhanzi subset of han used in writing simplified chinese sinhala unicode script name syriac unicode script name tagalog unicode script name tagbanwa unicode script name tamil unicode script name telugu unicode script name thaana unicode script name thai unicode script name tibetan unicode script name traditionalhanzi subset of han used in writing traditional chinese user special value denoting the native input of the user e.g. to input her name or text in her native language yi unicode script name 5.3.2 modifier tokens modifier tokens can be added to the scripts they apply in order to more closely specify the kind of characters expected in the form control. traditional pc keyboards do not need most modifier tokens indeed users on such devices would be quite confused if the software decided to change case on its own caps lock for uppercase may be an exception however modifier tokens can be very helpful to set input modes for small devices. input mode token comments lowercase lowercase for bicameral scripts uppercase uppercase for bicameral scripts titlecase title case for bicameral scripts words start with an upper case letter startupper start input with one uppercase letter then continue with lowercase letters digits digits of a particular script e.g. inputmode thai digits symbols symbols punctuation suitable for a particular script predicton text prediction switched on e.g. for running text predictoff text prediction switched off e.g. for passwords halfwidth half-width compatibility forms e.g. katakana deprecated 5.4 relationship to xml schema pattern facets user agents may use information available in an xml schema pattern facet to set the input mode. note that a pattern facet is a hard restriction on the lexical value of an instance data node and can specify different restrictions for different parts of the data item. attribute inputmode is a soft hint about the kinds of characters that the user may most probably start to input into the form control. attribute inputmode is provided in addition to pattern facets for the following reasons the set of allowable characters specified in a pattern may be so wide that it is not possible to deduce a reasonable input mode setting. nevertheless there frequently is a kind of characters that will be input by the user with high probability. in such a case inputmode allows to set the input mode for the user s convenience. in some cases it would be possible to derive the input mode setting from the pattern because the set of characters allowed in the pattern closely corresponds to a set of characters covered by an inputmode attribute value. however such a derivation would require a lot of data and calculations on the user agent. small devices may leave the checking of patterns to the server but will easily be able to switch to those input modes that they support. being able to make data entry for the user easier is of particular importance on small devices. 5.5 examples this is an example of a form for japanese address input. family name input name name inputmode kanji in kana input name namekana inputmode katakana given name input name given inputmode kanji in kana input name givenkana inputmode katakana postal code input name zip inputmode latin digits address input name address inputmode kanji in kana input name addresskana inputmode katakana email input name email inputmode latin lowercase telephone input name tel inputmode latin digits comments textarea name comments inputmode user predicton input name doit type submit value ok 6. acknowledgements version 1.0 of this specification was prepared by the w3c html working group. at the time of publication of the first edition the members were steven pemberton cwi html working group chair robert adams intel until november 2000 murray altheim sun microsystems takuya asada w3c until october 2000 daniel austin mozquito technologies mark baker sun microsystems wayne carr intel tantek elik microsoft andrew w. donoho ibm herman elenbaas philips electronics beth epperson netscape aol masayasu ishikawa w3c html activity lead shin ichi matsui panasonic shane mccarron applied testing and technology ann navarro webgeek inc. dave raggett w3c openwave systems sebastian schnitzenbaumer mozquito technologies until september 2000 peter stark ericsson michel suignard microsoft markku vartiainen openwave systems jeremy wadsworth quark inc. malte wedel mozquito technologies linda welsh intel ted wugofski openwave systems version 1.1 of this specification was produced by the w3c xhtml2 working group. at the time of publication the members were mark birbeck xport.net susan borgrink progeny systems alessio cartocci international webmasters association html writers guild iwa-hwg alexander graf university of innsbruck tina holmboe greytower john kugelman progeny systems luca mascaro international webmasters association html writers guild iwa-hwg shane mccarron applied testing and technology roland merrick chair ibm corporation steven pemberton chair staff contact cwi and w3c michael rawling ivis group limited sebastian schnitzenbaumer dreamlab technologies ag richard schwerdtfeger ibm corporation elias torres ibm corporation masataka yakura mitsue-links co. ltd. toshihiko yamakami access co. ltd. at publication of the second edition the membership was roland merrick ibm xhtml 2 working group co-chair steven pemberton cwi xhtml 2 working group co-chair mark birbeck webbackplane invited expert susan borgrink progeny systems christina bottomley society for technical communication stc alessio cartocci international webmasters association html writers guild iwa-hwg alexander graf university of innsbruck markus gylling daisy consortium tina holmboe greytower technologies invited expert john kugelman progeny systems luca mascaro international webmasters association html writers guild iwa-hwg shane mccarron applied testing and technology inc. invited expert michael rawling ivis group limited gregory rosmaita invited expert sebastian schnitzenbaumer dreamlab technologies ag richard schwerdtfeger ibm elias torres ibm masataka yakura mitsue-links co. ltd. toshihiko yamakami access co. ltd. thanks to gary adams sun microsystems jonny axelsson metastasis design peter chen philips dan connolly w3c john cowan reuters martin j. d rst w3c johan hjelm ericsson ian jacobs w3c susan lesch w3c louis theran nokia quinton zondervan lotus members of the w3c mobile access interest group the w3c synchronized multimedia working group the w3c wai protocols and formats working group and the open mobile alliance for contributing reviewing and commenting on this document. a. references a.1. normative references html4 html 4.01 specification w3c recommendation d. raggett a. le hors i. jacobs eds. 24 december 1999. available at http www.w3.org tr 1999 rec-html401-19991224 the latest version is available at http www.w3.org tr html4 rfc2854 the text html media type d. connely l. masinter january 2000. available at http www.ietf.org rfc rfc2854.txt rfc3236 the application xhtml+xml media type m. baker p. stark january 2002. available at http www.ietf.org rfc rfc3236.txt xhtml1 xhtml 1.0 the extensible hypertext markup language second edition a reformulation of html 4 in xml 1.0 w3c recommendation steven pemberton et al. 26 january 2000 revised 1 august 2002. available at http www.w3.org tr 2002 rec-xhtml1-20020801 the latest version is available at http www.w3.org tr xhtml1 xhtmlmod modularization of xhtml 1.1 second edition w3c recommendation s. mccarron ed. 29 july 2010. available at http www.w3.org tr 2010 rec-xhtml-modularization-20100729 the latest version is available at http www.w3.org tr xhtml-modularization xml extensible markup language xml 1.0 fourth edition w3c recommendation t. bray j. paoli c. m. sperberg-mcqueen e. maler f. yergeau eds. 16 august 2006. available at http www.w3.org tr 2006 rec-xml-20060816 the latest version is available at http www.w3.org tr rec-xml xmlschema xml schema part 1 structures second edition w3c recommendation h. s. thompson et al. eds. 28 october 2004. available at http www.w3.org tr 2004 rec-xmlschema-1-20041028 xml schema part 2 datatypes second edition w3c recommendation p. v. biron a. malhotra eds. 28 october 2004. available at http www.w3.org tr 2004 rec-xmlschema-2-20041028 a.2. informative references chtml compact html for small information appliances w3c note t. kamada 9 february 1998. available at http www.w3.org tr 1998 note-compacthtml-19980209 guidelines html 4.0 guidelines for mobile access w3c note t. kamada t. asada m. ishikawa s. matsui eds. 15 march 1999. available at http www.w3.org tr 1999 note-html40-mobile-19990315 the latest version is available at http www.w3.org tr note-html40-mobile java unicode blocks java 2 platform standard edition v 1.4.0 api specification class character.unicodeblock sun microsystems inc 2002. available at http java.sun.com j2se 1.4 docs api java lang character.unicodeblock.html. mobile web best practices mobile web best practices 1.0 w3c recommendation jo rabin charles mccathienevile eds. 29 july 2009. available at http www.w3.org tr 2008 rec-mobile-bp-20080729 the latest version is available at http www.w3.org tr mobile-bp uaag 1.0 user agent accessibility guidelines 1.0 ian jacobs jon gunderson eric hansen 2002. working draft available at http www.w3.org tr uaag10 unicode scripts script names mark davis 2001. unicode technical report 24 available at http www.unicode.org unicode reports tr24 wcag10 web content accessibility guidelines 1.0 w3c recommendation w. chisholm g. vanderheiden i. jacobs eds. 5 may 1999. available at http www.w3.org tr 1999 wai-webcontent-19990505 the latest version is available at http www.w3.org tr wcag10 wml wireless markup language specification wap forum ltd. the wap forum has consolidated into the open mobile alliance oma the specification work from wap continues within oma and can be found on the oma web site at http www.openmobilealliance.org tech affiliates wap wapindex.html xforms xforms 1.0 third edition john m boyer 29 october 2007. latest version available at http www.w3.org tr xforms xhtmlmime xhtml media types shane mccarron 16 january 2009 or its successors. latest version available at http www.w3.org tr xhtml-media-types b. xhtml basic document type definition this appendix is normative. the dtd implementation of xhtml basic 1.1 is contained in this appendix. there are direct links to the various files and the files are also contained in the gzip d tar and zip archives linked to at the top of this document. please note that the files targeted by the latest version links may change slowly over time. see the w3c xhtml2 working group home page for more information. b.1. sgml open catalog entry for xhtml basic this section contains the sgml open catalog-format definition of the public identifiers for xhtml basic. you can download this version of this file from http www.w3.org tr 2009 rec-xhtml-basic-20101123 xhtml-basic11.cat. the latest version is available at http www.w3.org markup dtd xhtml-basic11.cat. file catalog xhtml basic catalog data file revision id index.html v 1.2 2010 11 24 21 47 40 bertails exp smi see entity management sgml open technical resolution 9401 for detailed information on supplying and using catalog data. this document is available from oasis at url http www.oasis-open.org html tr9401.html sgml declaration associated with xml override yes sgmldecl xml1.dcl xhtml basic dtd modular driver file public w3c dtd xhtml basic 1.1 en xhtml-basic11.dtd xhtml basic framework module public w3c entities xhtml basic 1.1 document model 1.0 en xhtml-basic11-model-1.mod xhtml inputmode module public w3c elements xhtml inputmode 1.0 en xhtml-inputmode-1.mod end of catalog data b.2. xhtml basic driver this section contains the driver for the xhtml basic document type implementation as an xml dtd. it relies upon xhtml module implementations defined in xhtmlmod you can download this version of this file from http www.w3.org tr 2009 rec-xhtml-basic-20101123 xhtml-basic11.dtd. the latest version is available at http www.w3.org markup dtd xhtml-basic11.dtd. xhtml basic 1.1 dtd file xhtml-basic11.dtd xhtml basic 1.1 dtd this is xhtml basic a proper subset of xhtml. the extensible hypertext markup language xhtml copyright 1998-2007 world wide web consortium massachusetts institute of technology european research consortium for informatics and mathematics keio university all rights reserved. permission to use copy modify and distribute the xhtml basic dtd and its accompanying documentation for any purpose and without fee is hereby granted in perpetuity provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph appear in all copies. the copyright holders make no representation about the suitability of the dtd for any purpose. it is provided as is without expressed or implied warranty. editors murray m. altheim mailto altheim@eng.sun.com peter stark mailto peter.stark@ecs.ericsson.se shane mccarron mailto shane@aptest.com revision id index.html v 1.2 2010 11 24 21 47 40 bertails exp this is the driver file for version 1.1 of the xhtml basic dtd. this dtd is identified by the public and system identifiers public w3c dtd xhtml basic 1.1 en system http www.w3.org markup dtd xhtml-basic11.dtd entity xhtml.version w3c dtd xhtml basic 1.1 en use this uri to identify the default namespace http www.w3.org 1999 xhtml see the qualified names module for information on the use of namespace prefixes in the dtd. entity ns.prefixed ignore entity xhtml.prefix reserved for use with the xlink namespace entity xlink.xmlns entity xlink.xmlns.attrib for example if you are using xhtml basic 1.1 directly use the public identifier in the doctype declaration with the namespace declaration on the document element to identify the default namespace xml version 1.0 doctype html public w3c dtd xhtml basic 1.1 en http www.w3.org markup dtd xhtml-basic11.dtd html xmlns http www.w3.org 1999 xhtml xml lang en html reserved for future use with document profiles entity xhtml.profile bidirectional text features this feature-test entity is used to declare elements and attributes used for bidirectional text support. entity xhtml.bidi ignore doc type doctype role title xhtml basic 1.1 entity xhtml-events.module include entity xhtml-bdo.module xhtml.bidi inline style module entity xhtml-inlstyle.module include xhtml-inlstyle.module entity xhtml-inlstyle.mod public w3c elements xhtml inline style 1.0 en http www.w3.org markup dtd xhtml-inlstyle-1.mod xhtml-inlstyle.mod entity xhtml-model.mod public w3c entities xhtml basic 1.1 document model 1.0 en http www.w3.org markup dtd xhtml-basic11-model-1.mod adding the lang attribute into the i18n collection entity xhtml-datatypes.module include xhtml-datatypes.module entity xhtml-datatypes.mod public w3c entities xhtml datatypes 1.0 en xhtml-datatypes-1.mod xhtml-datatypes.mod entity lang.attrib xml lang languagecode.datatype implied lang languagecode.datatype implied entity xhtml-framework.mod public w3c entities xhtml modular framework 1.0 en http www.w3.org markup dtd xhtml-framework-1.mod xhtml-framework.mod entity pre.content pcdata inlstruct.class inlphras.class anchor.class inline.extra entity xhtml-text.mod public w3c elements xhtml text 1.0 en http www.w3.org markup dtd xhtml-text-1.mod xhtml-text.mod entity xhtml-hypertext.mod public w3c elements xhtml hypertext 1.0 en http www.w3.org markup dtd xhtml-hypertext-1.mod xhtml-hypertext.mod entity xhtml-list.mod public w3c elements xhtml lists 1.0 en http www.w3.org markup dtd xhtml-list-1.mod xhtml-list.mod add in the value attribute to the li element attlist li.qname value number.datatype implied scripting module entity xhtml-script.module include xhtml-script.module entity xhtml-script.mod public w3c elements xhtml scripting 1.0 en http www.w3.org markup dtd xhtml-script-1.mod xhtml-script.mod style sheets module entity xhtml-style.module include xhtml-style.module entity xhtml-style.mod public w3c elements xhtml style sheets 1.0 en http www.w3.org markup dtd xhtml-style-1.mod xhtml-style.mod image module entity xhtml-image.module include xhtml-image.module entity xhtml-image.mod public w3c elements xhtml images 1.0 en http www.w3.org markup dtd xhtml-image-1.mod xhtml-image.mod tables module entity xhtml-table.module include xhtml-table.module entity xhtml-table.mod public w3c elements xhtml basic tables 1.0 en http www.w3.org markup dtd xhtml-basic-table-1.mod xhtml-table.mod forms module entity xhtml-form.module include xhtml-form.module entity xhtml-form.mod public w3c elements xhtml forms 1.0 en http www.w3.org markup dtd xhtml-form-1.mod xhtml-form.mod presentation module entity xhtml-pres.module include xhtml-pres.module entity xhtml-pres.mod public w3c elements xhtml presentation 1.0 en http www.w3.org markup dtd xhtml-pres-1.mod xhtml-pres.mod link element module entity xhtml-link.module include xhtml-link.module entity xhtml-link.mod public w3c elements xhtml link element 1.0 en http www.w3.org markup dtd xhtml-link-1.mod xhtml-link.mod document metainformation module entity xhtml-meta.module include xhtml-meta.module entity xhtml-meta.mod public w3c elements xhtml metainformation 1.0 en http www.w3.org markup dtd xhtml-meta-1.mod xhtml-meta.mod base element module entity xhtml-base.module include xhtml-base.module entity xhtml-base.mod public w3c elements xhtml base element 1.0 en http www.w3.org markup dtd xhtml-base-1.mod xhtml-base.mod param element module entity xhtml-param.module include xhtml-param.module entity xhtml-param.mod public w3c elements xhtml param element 1.0 en http www.w3.org markup dtd xhtml-param-1.mod xhtml-param.mod embedded object module entity xhtml-object.module include xhtml-object.module entity xhtml-object.mod public w3c elements xhtml embedded object 1.0 en http www.w3.org markup dtd xhtml-object-1.mod xhtml-object.mod inputmode attribute module entity xhtml-inputmode.module include xhtml-inputmode.module entity xhtml-inputmode.mod public w3c elements xhtml inputmode 1.0 en http www.w3.org markup dtd xhtml-inputmode-1.mod xhtml-inputmode.mod target attribute module entity xhtml-target.module include xhtml-target.module entity xhtml-target.mod public w3c elements xhtml target 1.0 en http www.w3.org markup dtd xhtml-target-1.mod xhtml-target.mod entity xhtml-struct.mod public w3c elements xhtml document structure 1.0 en http www.w3.org markup dtd xhtml-struct-1.mod xhtml-struct.mod end of xhtml basic 1.1 dtd b.3. xhtml basic customizations an xhtml family document type such as xhtml basic must define the content model that it uses. this is done through a separate content model module that is instantiated by the xhtml modular framework. the content model module and the xhtml basic driver above work together to customize the module implementations to the document type s specific requirements. the content model module for xhtml basic is defined below you can download this version of this file from http www.w3.org tr 2009 rec-xhtml-basic-20101123 xhtml-basic11-model-1.mod. the latest version is available at http www.w3.org markup dtd xhtml-basic11-model-1.mod. xhtml basic 1.1 document model module file xhtml-basic11-model-1.mod this is xhtml basic a proper subset of xhtml. copyright 1998-2007 w3c mit ercim keio all rights reserved. revision id index.html v 1.2 2010 11 24 21 47 40 bertails exp smi this dtd module is identified by the public and system identifiers public w3c entities xhtml basic 1.1 document model 1.0 en system http www.w3.org markup dtd xhtml-basic11-model-1.mod revisions none xhtml basic document model this module describes the groupings of elements that make up common content models for xhtml elements. optional elements in head entity headopts.mix script.qname style.qname meta.qname link.qname object.qname script and noscript are used to contain scripts and alternative content entity script.class script.qname noscript.qname miscellaneous elements entity misc.extra these elements are neither block nor inline and can essentially be used anywhere in the document body. entity misc.class script.class misc.extra inline elements entity inlstruct.class br.qname span.qname entity inlphras.class em.qname strong.qname dfn.qname code.qname samp.qname kbd.qname var.qname cite.qname abbr.qname acronym.qname q.qname entity inlpres.class tt.qname i.qname b.qname big.qname small.qname sub.qname sup.qname entity i18n.class entity anchor.class a.qname entity inlspecial.class img.qname object.qname entity inlform.class input.qname select.qname textarea.qname label.qname button.qname entity inline.extra entity inline.class inlstruct.class inlphras.class inlpres.class anchor.class inlspecial.class inlform.class inline.extra entity inlnoanchor.class inlstruct.class inlphras.class inlpres.class inlspecial.class inlform.class inline.extra entity inlnoanchor.mix inlnoanchor.class misc.class entity inline.mix inline.class misc.class block elements entity heading.class h1.qname h2.qname h3.qname h4.qname h5.qname h6.qname entity list.class ul.qname ol.qname dl.qname entity table.class table.qname entity form.class form.qname entity fieldset.class fieldset.qname entity blkstruct.class p.qname div.qname entity blkphras.class pre.qname blockquote.qname address.qname entity blkpres.class hr.qname entity blkspecial.class table.class form.class fieldset.class entity block.extra entity block.class blkstruct.class blkphras.class blkpres.class blkspecial.class block.extra entity block.mix heading.class list.class block.class misc.class all content elements declares all content except tables entity flownotable.mix heading.class list.class blkstruct.class blkphras.class form.class block.extra inline.class misc.class entity flow.mix heading.class list.class block.class inline.class misc.class end of xhtml-basic11-model-1.mod finally we define the new inputmode attribute module. you can download this version of this file from http www.w3.org tr 2009 rec-xhtml-basic-20101123 xhtml-inputmode-1.mod. the latest version is available at http www.w3.org markup dtd xhtml-inputmode-1.mod. xhtml inputmode module file xhtml-inputmode-1.mod this is xhtml a reformulation of html as a modular xml application. copyright 1998-2007 w3c mit ercim keio all rights reserved. revision id index.html v 1.2 2010 11 24 21 47 40 bertails exp this dtd module is identified by the public and system identifiers public w3c elements xhtml inputmode 1.0 en system http www.w3.org markup dtd xhtml-inputmode-1.mod revisions none inputmode inputmode this module declares the inputmode attribute used for suggesting the input mode associated with an input or textarea element. render in this frame entity inputmode.datatype cdata add inputmode attribute to input element attlist input.qname inputmode inputmode.datatype implied add inputmode attribute to textarea element attlist textarea.qname inputmode inputmode.datatype implied end of xhtml-inputmode-1.mod c. xhtml basic xml schema definition this appendix is normative. c.1. xhtml basic xml schema driver this section contains the driver for the xhtml basic document type implementation as an xml schema. it relies upon xhtml module implementations defined in xhtmlmod xml version 1.0 encoding utf-8 xs schema targetnamespace http www.w3.org 1999 xhtml xmlns xs http www.w3.org 2001 xmlschema xmlns xh11d http www.w3.org 1999 xhtml datatypes xmlns http www.w3.org 1999 xhtml blockdefault all xs annotation xs documentation this is the xml schema driver for xhtml basic 1.1. please use this namespace for xhtml elements http www.w3.org 1999 xhtml id index.html v 1.2 2010 11 24 21 47 40 bertails exp xs documentation xs annotation xs annotation xs documentation this is xhtml basic copyright 169 1998-2008 world wide web consortium massachusetts institute of technology european research consortium for informatics and mathematics keio university all rights reserved. permission to use copy modify and distribute the xhtml schema modules and their accompanying xs documentation for any purpose and without fee is hereby granted in perpetuity provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph appear in all copies. the copyright holders make no representation about the suitability of these xml schema modules for any purpose. they are provided as is without expressed or implied warranty. xs documentation xs annotation xs annotation xs documentation this is the schema driver file for xhtml basic 1.1 document type this schema includes imports external schemas xml.xsd refedines and include s schema modules for xhtml basic 1.1 document type. includes schema for named content model for the xhtml basic 1.1 document type xhtml basic 1.1 document type includes the following modules xhtml core modules required for xhtml family conformance text hypertext lists structure redefined other xhtml modules link metainformation intrinsic events scripting stylesheet style attribute target inputmode base image object presentation param forms basic tables xs documentation xs annotation xs import namespace http www.w3.org xml 1998 namespace schemalocation http www.w3.org 2001 xml.xsd xs annotation xs documentation this import brings in the xml namespace attributes the xml attributes are used by various modules xs documentation xs annotation xs import xs include schemalocation xhtml-basic11-model-1.xsd xs annotation xs documentation document model module for the xhtml basic 1.1 document type this schema file defines all named models used by xhtml modularization framework for xhtml basic 1.1 document type xs documentation xs annotation xs include xs include schemalocation xhtml-basic11-modules-1.xsd xs annotation xs documentation schema that includes the modules and redefinitions for xhtml basic 1.1 document type. xs documentation xs annotation xs include xs schema c.2. xhtml basic schema modules xhtml family implementations using xml schema are required to provide their own schema module that imports the required modules from xhtml modularization. xml version 1.0 encoding utf-8 xs schema xmlns xs http www.w3.org 2001 xmlschema elementformdefault qualified xmlns xh11d http www.w3.org 1999 xhtml datatypes xs import namespace http www.w3.org 1999 xhtml datatypes schemalocation http www.w3.org markup schema xhtml-datatypes-1.xsd xs annotation xs documentation this schema includes all modules for xhtml basic 1.1 document type. id index.html v 1.2 2010 11 24 21 47 40 bertails exp xs documentation xs documentation source xhtml-copyright-1.xsd xs annotation xs annotation xs documentation this schema includes all modules and redefinitions for xhtml basic 1.1 document type. xhtml basic 1.1 document type includes the following modules xhtml core modules required for xhtml family conformance text hypertext lists structure other xhtml modules link meta base image object param basic forms basic tables xs documentation xs annotation xs include schemalocation http www.w3.org markup schema xhtml-framework-1.xsd xs annotation xs documentation schema framework component modules notations datatypes common attributes character entities xs documentation xs documentation source http www.w3.org tr xhtml-modularization abstract_modules.html#s_commonatts xs annotation xs include xs include schemalocation http www.w3.org markup schema xhtml-text-1.xsd xs annotation xs documentation text module the text module includes declarations for all core text container elements and their attributes. block phrasal block structural inline phrasal inline structural elements defined here address blockquote pre h1 h2 h3 h4 h5 h6 div p abbr acronym cite code dfn em kbd q samp strong var br span xs documentation xs documentation source http www.w3.org tr 2001 rec-xhtml-modularization-20010410 abstract_modules.html#s_textmodule xs annotation xs include xs redefine schemalocation http www.w3.org markup schema xhtml-hypertext-1.xsd xs annotation xs documentation hypertext module elements defined here a xs documentation xs documentation source http www.w3.org tr 2001 rec-xhtml-modularization-20010410 abstract_modules.html#s_hypertextmodule xs annotation xs attributegroup name xhtml.a.attlist xs attributegroup ref xhtml.a.attlist xs attributegroup ref xhtml.a.events.attlist xs annotation xs documentation redefinition by xhtml event attribute module xs documentation xs annotation xs attributegroup xs attributegroup ref xhtml.a.target.attlist xs annotation xs documentation target module a attribute additions xs documentation xs annotation xs attributegroup xs attributegroup xs redefine xs redefine schemalocation http www.w3.org markup schema xhtml-list-1.xsd xs annotation xs documentation lists module elements defined here dt dd dl ol ul li xs documentation xs documentation source http www.w3.org tr 2001 rec-xhtml-modularization-20010410 abstract_modules.html#s_listmodule xs annotation xs attributegroup name xhtml.li.attlist xs attributegroup ref xhtml.li.attlist xs attribute name value type xh11d number xs attributegroup xs redefine xs redefine schemalocation http www.w3.org markup schema xhtml-struct-1.xsd xs annotation xs documentation structural module elements defined here title head body html xs documentation xs documentation source http www.w3.org tr 2001 rec-xhtml-modularization-20010410 abstract_modules.html#s_structuremodule xs annotation xs attributegroup name xhtml.version.attrib xs annotation xs documentation redefinition by the xhtml11 markup for value of version attr xs documentation xs annotation xs attribute name version type xh11d cdata fixed w3c dtd xhtml basic 1.1 en xs attributegroup xs attributegroup name xhtml.body.attlist xs attributegroup ref xhtml.body.attlist xs annotation xs documentation original body attlist xs documentation xs annotation xs attributegroup xs attributegroup ref xhtml.body.events.attlist xs annotation xs documentation redefinition by xhtml event attribute module xs documentation xs annotation xs attributegroup xs attributegroup xs redefine xs include schemalocation http www.w3.org markup schema xhtml-pres-1.xsd xs annotation xs documentation presentational module elements defined here hr b big i small sub sup tt xs documentation xs documentation source http www.w3.org tr xhtml-modularization abstract_modules.html#s_presentationmodule xs annotation xs include xs redefine schemalocation http www.w3.org markup schema xhtml-link-1.xsd xs annotation xs documentation link module elements defined here link xs documentation xs documentation source http www.w3.org tr xhtml-modularization abstract_modules.html#s_linkmodule xs annotation xs attributegroup name xhtml.link.attlist xs annotation xs documentation changes to xhtml link attlist xs documentation xs annotation xs attributegroup ref xhtml.link.attlist xs annotation xs documentation original link attributes declared in link module xs documentation xs annotation xs attributegroup xs attributegroup ref xhtml.link.target.attlist xs annotation xs documentation xhtml target module attribute additions xs documentation xs annotation xs attributegroup xs attributegroup xs redefine xs include schemalocation http www.w3.org markup schema xhtml-meta-1.xsd xs annotation xs documentation meta module elements defined here meta xs documentation xs documentation source http www.w3.org tr xhtml-modularization abstract_modules.html#s_metamodule xs annotation xs include xs redefine schemalocation http www.w3.org markup schema xhtml-base-1.xsd xs annotation xs documentation base module elements defined here base xs documentation xs documentation source http www.w3.org tr xhtml-modularization abstract_modules.html#s_basemodule xs annotation xs attributegroup name xhtml.base.attlist xs annotation xs documentation changes to xhtml base attlist xs documentation xs annotation xs attributegroup ref xhtml.base.attlist xs annotation xs documentation original base attributes declared in base module xs documentation xs annotation xs attributegroup xs attributegroup ref xhtml.base.target.attlist xs annotation xs documentation xhtml target module attribute additions xs documentation xs annotation xs attributegroup xs attributegroup xs redefine xs include schemalocation http www.w3.org markup schema xhtml-script-1.xsd xs annotation xs documentation scripting module elements defined here script noscript xs documentation xs documentation source http www.w3.org tr xhtml-modularization abstract_modules.html#s_scriptmodule xs annotation xs include xs include schemalocation http www.w3.org markup schema xhtml-style-1.xsd xs annotation xs documentation style module elements defined here style xs documentation xs documentation source http www.w3.org tr xhtml-modularization abstract_modules.html#s_stylemodule xs annotation xs include xs include schemalocation http www.w3.org markup schema xhtml-inlstyle-1.xsd xs annotation xs documentation style attribute module attribute defined here style xs documentation xs documentation source http www.w3.org tr xhtml-modularization abstract_modules.html#s_styleattributemodule xs annotation xs include xs redefine schemalocation http www.w3.org markup schema xhtml-image-1.xsd xs annotation xs documentation image module elements defined here img xs documentation xs documentation source http www.w3.org tr xhtml-modularization abstract_modules.html#s_imagemodule xs annotation xs attributegroup name xhtml.img.attlist xs attributegroup ref xhtml.img.attlist xs annotation xs documentation original image attributes in image module xs documentation xs annotation xs attributegroup xs attributegroup xs redefine xs redefine schemalocation http www.w3.org markup schema xhtml-object-1.xsd xs annotation xs documentation object module elements defined here object xs documentation xs documentation source http www.w3.org tr xhtml-modularization abstract_modules.html#s_objectmodule xs annotation xs attributegroup name xhtml.object.attlist xs attributegroup ref xhtml.object.attlist xs annotation xs documentation original object attlist xs documentation xs annotation xs attributegroup xs attributegroup xs redefine xs include schemalocation http www.w3.org markup schema xhtml-param-1.xsd xs annotation xs documentation param module elements defined here param xs documentation xs annotation xs include xs include schemalocation http www.w3.org markup schema xhtml-basic-table-1.xsd xs annotation xs documentation basic tables module note that this module is not used in xhtml it is designed for use with xhtml basic elements defined here table caption tr th td xs documentation xs documentation source http www.w3.org tr xhtml-modularization abstract_modules.html#s_simpletablemodule xs annotation xs include xs redefine schemalocation http www.w3.org markup schema xhtml-form-1.xsd xs annotation xs documentation forms module elements defined here form label input select optgroup option textarea fieldset legend button xs documentation xs documentation source http www.w3.org tr xhtml-modularization abstract_modules.html#s_extformsmodule xs annotation xs attributegroup name xhtml.form.attlist xs annotation xs documentation changes to xhtml form attlist xs documentation xs annotation xs attributegroup ref xhtml.form.attlist xs annotation xs documentation original form attributes declared in forms module xs documentation xs annotation xs attributegroup xs attributegroup ref xhtml.form.events.attlist xs annotation xs documentation xhtml events module attribute additions xs documentation xs annotation xs attributegroup xs attributegroup ref xhtml.form.target.attlist xs annotation xs documentation xhtml target module attribute additions xs documentation xs annotation xs attributegroup xs attributegroup xs attributegroup name xhtml.input.attlist xs annotation xs documentation changes to xhtml form input element xs documentation xs annotation xs attributegroup ref xhtml.input.attlist xs annotation xs documentation original input attributes in forms module xs documentation xs annotation xs attributegroup xs attributegroup ref xhtml.input.events.attlist xs annotation xs documentation redefinition by event attribute module xs documentation xs annotation xs attributegroup xs attributegroup ref xhtml.input.inputmode.attlist xs annotation xs documentation redefinition by inputmode attribute module xs documentation xs annotation xs attributegroup xs attributegroup xs attributegroup name xhtml.label.attlist xs attributegroup ref xhtml.label.attlist xs annotation xs documentation original label attributes in forms module xs documentation xs annotation xs attributegroup xs attributegroup ref xhtml.label.events.attlist xs annotation xs documentation redefinition by event attribute module xs documentation xs annotation xs attributegroup xs attributegroup xs attributegroup name xhtml.select.attlist xs attributegroup ref xhtml.select.attlist xs annotation xs documentation original select attributes in forms module xs documentation xs annotation xs attributegroup xs attributegroup ref xhtml.select.events.attlist xs annotation xs documentation redefinition by event attribute module xs documentation xs annotation xs attributegroup xs attributegroup xs attributegroup name xhtml.textarea.attlist xs attributegroup ref xhtml.textarea.attlist xs annotation xs documentation original textarea attributes in forms module xs documentation xs annotation xs attributegroup xs attributegroup ref xhtml.textarea.events.attlist xs annotation xs documentation redefinition by event attribute module xs documentation xs annotation xs attributegroup xs attributegroup ref xhtml.input.inputmode.attlist xs annotation xs documentation redefinition by inputmode attribute module xs documentation xs annotation xs attributegroup xs attributegroup xs attributegroup name xhtml.button.attlist xs attributegroup ref xhtml.button.attlist xs annotation xs documentation original button attributes in forms module xs documentation xs annotation xs attributegroup xs attributegroup ref xhtml.button.events.attlist xs annotation xs documentation redefinition by event attribute module xs documentation xs annotation xs attributegroup xs attributegroup xs redefine xs include schemalocation http www.w3.org markup schema xhtml-events-1.xsd xs annotation xs documentation xhtml events modules attributes defined here xhtml event types xs documentation xs documentation source http www.w3.org tr xhtml-modularization abstract_modules.html#s_intrinsiceventsmodule xs annotation xs include xs include schemalocation http www.w3.org markup schema xhtml-target-1.xsd xs annotation xs documentation xhtml target attribute module attributes defined here target xs documentation xs documentation source http www.w3.org tr xhtml-modularization abstract_modules.html#s_targetmodule xs annotation xs include xs include schemalocation http www.w3.org markup schema xhtml-inputmode-1.xsd xs annotation xs documentation xhtml inputmode module attributes defined here inputmode xs documentation xs documentation source http www.w3.org tr xhtml-basic#s_inputmode xs annotation xs include xs schema c.3. xhtml basic customizations an xhtml family document type such as xhtml basic must define the content model that it uses. this is done through a separate content model module that is instantiated by the xhtml modular framework. the content model module and the xhtml basic driver above work together to customize the module implementations to the document type s specific requirements. the content model module for xhtml basic is defined below xml version 1.0 encoding utf-8 xs schema xmlns xs http www.w3.org 2001 xmlschema elementformdefault qualified xmlns xh11d http www.w3.org 1999 xhtml datatypes xs import namespace http www.w3.org 1999 xhtml datatypes schemalocation http www.w3.org markup schema xhtml-datatypes-1.xsd xs annotation xs documentation this is the xml schema module of named xhtml content models for xhtml basic 10 id index.html v 1.2 2010 11 24 21 47 40 bertails exp xs documentation xs documentation source xhtml-copyright-1.xsd xs annotation xs annotation xs documentation xhtml basic 1.1 document model this module describes the groupings of elements attributes that make up common content models for xhtml elements. xhtml has following basic content models xhtml.inline.mix character-level elements xhtml.block.mix block-like elements e.g. paragraphs and lists xhtml.flow.mix any block or inline elements xhtml.headopts.mix head elements xhtml.inlinepre.mix special class for pre content model xhtml.inlinenoanchor.mix content model for anchor any groups declared in this module may be used to create element content models but the above are considered global insofar as that term applies here xhtml has the following attribute groups xhtml.core.extra.attrib xhtml.i18n.extra.attrib xhtml.common.extra the above attribute groups are considered global xs documentation xs annotation xs attributegroup name xhtml.i18n.extra.attrib xs annotation xs documentation extended i18n attribute xs documentation xs annotation xs attribute name lang type xh11d languagecode xs attributegroup xs attributegroup name xhtml.common.extra xs annotation xs documentation extended common attributes xs documentation xs annotation xs attributegroup ref xhtml.style.attrib xs annotation xs documentation style attribute from inline style module xs documentation xs annotation xs attributegroup xs attributegroup ref xhtml.events.attrib xs annotation xs documentation attributes from events module xs documentation xs annotation xs attributegroup xs attributegroup xs attributegroup name xhtml.core.extra.attrib xs annotation xs documentation extend core attributes xs documentation xs annotation xs attributegroup xs attributegroup name xhtml.global.core.extra.attrib xs annotation xs documentation extended global core attributes xs documentation xs annotation xs attributegroup xs attributegroup name xhtml.global.i18n.extra.attrib xs annotation xs documentation extended global i18n attributes xs documentation xs annotation xs attributegroup xs attributegroup name xhtml.global.common.extra xs annotation xs documentation extended global common attributes xs documentation xs annotation xs attributegroup xs group name xhtml.head.extra xs sequence xs group xs group name xhtml.headopts.mix xs choice xs element name script type xhtml.script.type xs element name style type xhtml.style.type xs element name meta type xhtml.meta.type xs element name link type xhtml.link.type xs element name object type xhtml.object.type xs group ref xhtml.head.extra xs choice xs group xs group name xhtml.head.content xs sequence xs group ref xhtml.headopts.mix minoccurs 0 maxoccurs unbounded xs choice xs sequence xs element name title minoccurs 1 maxoccurs 1 type xhtml.title.type xs group ref xhtml.headopts.mix minoccurs 0 maxoccurs unbounded xs sequence minoccurs 0 xs element name base type xhtml.base.type xs group ref xhtml.headopts.mix minoccurs 0 maxoccurs unbounded xs sequence xs sequence xs sequence xs element name base type xhtml.base.type minoccurs 1 maxoccurs 1 xs group ref xhtml.headopts.mix minoccurs 0 maxoccurs unbounded xs element name title minoccurs 1 maxoccurs 1 type xhtml.title.type xs group ref xhtml.headopts.mix minoccurs 0 maxoccurs unbounded xs sequence xs choice xs sequence xs group script and noscript are used to contain scripts and alternative content xs group name xhtml.script.class xs choice xs element name script type xhtml.script.type xs element name noscript type xhtml.noscript.type xs choice xs group xs group name xhtml.misc.extra xs sequence xs group these elements are neither block nor inline and can essentially be used anywhere in the document body. xs group name xhtml.misc.class xs choice xs group ref xhtml.script.class xs group ref xhtml.misc.extra xs choice xs group inline elements xs group name xhtml.inlstruct.class xs choice xs element name br type xhtml.br.type xs element name span type xhtml.span.type xs choice xs group xs group name xhtml.inlphras.class xs choice xs element name em type xhtml.em.type xs element name strong type xhtml.strong.type xs element name dfn type xhtml.dfn.type xs element name code type xhtml.code.type xs element name samp type xhtml.samp.type xs element name kbd type xhtml.kbd.type xs element name var type xhtml.var.type xs element name cite type xhtml.cite.type xs element name abbr type xhtml.abbr.type xs element name acronym type xhtml.acronym.type xs element name q type xhtml.q.type xs choice xs group xs group name xhtml.inlpres.class xs choice xs element name tt type xhtml.inlpres.type xs element name i type xhtml.inlpres.type xs element name b type xhtml.inlpres.type xs element name big type xhtml.inlpres.type xs element name small type xhtml.inlpres.type xs element name sub type xhtml.inlpres.type xs element name sup type xhtml.inlpres.type xs choice xs group xs group name xhtml.i18n.class xs sequence xs group xs group name xhtml.anchor.class xs sequence xs element name a type xhtml.a.type xs sequence xs group xs group name xhtml.inlspecial.class xs choice xs element name img type xhtml.img.type xs element name object type xhtml.object.type xs choice xs group xs group name xhtml.inlform.class xs choice xs element name input type xhtml.input.type xs element name select type xhtml.select.type xs element name textarea type xhtml.textarea.type xs element name label type xhtml.label.type xs element name button type xhtml.button.type xs choice xs group xs group name xhtml.inline.extra xs sequence xs group inline.class includes all inline elements used as a component in mixes xs group name xhtml.inline.class xs choice xs group ref xhtml.inlstruct.class xs group ref xhtml.inlphras.class xs group ref xhtml.inlpres.class xs group ref xhtml.anchor.class xs group ref xhtml.inlspecial.class xs group ref xhtml.inlform.class xs group ref xhtml.inline.extra xs choice xs group inlinepre.mix used as a component in pre model xs group name xhtml.inlinepre.mix xs choice xs group ref xhtml.inlstruct.class xs group ref xhtml.inlphras.class xs element name tt type xhtml.inlpres.type xs element name i type xhtml.inlpres.type xs element name b type xhtml.inlpres.type xs group ref xhtml.anchor.class xs group ref xhtml.misc.class xs group ref xhtml.inline.extra xs choice xs group inlnoanchor.class includes all non-anchor inlines used as a component in mixes xs group name xhtml.inlnoanchor.class xs choice xs group ref xhtml.inlstruct.class xs group ref xhtml.inlphras.class xs group ref xhtml.inlpres.class xs group ref xhtml.inlspecial.class xs group ref xhtml.inlform.class xs group ref xhtml.inline.extra xs choice xs group inlnoanchor.mix includes all non-anchor inlines xs group name xhtml.inlnoanchor.mix xs choice xs group ref xhtml.inlnoanchor.class xs group ref xhtml.misc.class xs choice xs group inline.mix includes all inline elements including misc.class xs group name xhtml.inline.mix xs choice xs group ref xhtml.inline.class xs group ref xhtml.misc.class xs choice xs group in the html 4 dtd heading and list elements were included in the block group. the heading.class and list.class groups must now be included explicitly on element declarations where desired. xs group name xhtml.heading.class xs choice xs element name h1 type xhtml.h1.type xs element name h2 type xhtml.h2.type xs element name h3 type xhtml.h3.type xs element name h4 type xhtml.h4.type xs element name h5 type xhtml.h5.type xs element name h6 type xhtml.h6.type xs choice xs group xs group name xhtml.list.class xs choice xs element name ul type xhtml.ul.type xs element name ol type xhtml.ol.type xs element name dl type xhtml.dl.type xs choice xs group xs group name xhtml.table.class xs choice xs element name table type xhtml.table.type xs choice xs group xs group name xhtml.form.class xs choice xs element name form type xhtml.form.type xs choice xs group xs group name xhtml.fieldset.class xs choice xs element name fieldset type xhtml.fieldset.type xs choice xs group xs group name xhtml.blkstruct.class xs choice xs element name p type xhtml.p.type xs element name div type xhtml.div.type xs choice xs group xs group name xhtml.blkphras.class xs choice xs element name pre type xhtml.pre.type xs element name blockquote type xhtml.blockquote.type xs element name address type xhtml.address.type xs choice xs group xs group name xhtml.blkpres.class xs sequence xs element name hr type xhtml.hr.type xs sequence xs group xs group name xhtml.blkspecial.class xs choice xs group ref xhtml.table.class xs group ref xhtml.form.class xs group ref xhtml.fieldset.class xs choice xs group xs group name xhtml.block.extra xs sequence xs group block.class includes all block elements used as an component in mixes xs group name xhtml.block.class xs choice xs group ref xhtml.blkstruct.class xs group ref xhtml.blkphras.class xs group ref xhtml.blkpres.class xs group ref xhtml.blkspecial.class xs group ref xhtml.block.extra xs choice xs group block.mix includes all block elements plus misc.class xs group name xhtml.block.mix xs choice xs group ref xhtml.heading.class xs group ref xhtml.list.class xs group ref xhtml.block.class xs group ref xhtml.misc.class xs choice xs group all content elements flow.mix includes all text content block and inline note that the any element included here allows us to add data from any other namespace a necessity for compound document creation. note however that it is not possible to add to any head level element without further modification. to add rdf metadata to the head of a document modify the structure module. xs group name xhtml.flow.mix xs choice xs group ref xhtml.heading.class xs group ref xhtml.list.class xs group ref xhtml.block.class xs group ref xhtml.inline.class xs group ref xhtml.misc.class xs choice xs group xs group name xhtml.flownotable.mix xs choice xs group ref xhtml.heading.class xs group ref xhtml.list.class xs group ref xhtml.blkstruct.class xs group ref xhtml.blkphras.class xs group ref xhtml.form.class xs group ref xhtml.inline.class xs group ref xhtml.misc.class xs choice xs group blknoform.mix includes all non-form block elements plus misc.class xs group name xhtml.blknoform.mix xs choice xs group ref xhtml.heading.class xs group ref xhtml.list.class xs group ref xhtml.blkstruct.class xs group ref xhtml.blkphras.class xs group ref xhtml.blkpres.class xs group ref xhtml.table.class xs group ref xhtml.block.extra xs group ref xhtml.misc.class xs choice xs group xs element name html type xhtml.html.type xs schema 