xml essentials w3c w3c standards participate membership about w3c site navigation xml technology publishing processing components query transformation security schema xml essentials skip w3c standards xml technology xml essentials xml essentials on this page what is xml what is xml used for examples learn more current status of specifications and groups what is xml the extensible markup language xml is a simple text-based format for representing structured information documents data configuration books transactions invoices and much more. it was derived from an older standard format called sgml iso 8879 in order to be more suitable for web use. what is xml used for xml is one of the most widely-used formats for sharing structured information today between programs between people between computers and people both locally and across networks. a short example part number 1976 name windscreen wiper name description the windscreen wiper automatically removes rain from your windscreen if it should happen to splash there. it has a rubber ref part 1977 blade ref which can be ordered separately if you need to replace it. description part if you are already familiar with html you can see that xml is very similar. however the syntax rules of xml are strict xml tools will not process files that contain errors but instead will give you error messages so that you fix them. this means that almost all xml documents can be processed reliably by computer software. the main differences from html are all elements must be closed or marked as empty. empty elements can be closed as normal happiness happiness or you can use a special short-form happiness instead. in html you only need to quote an attribute value under certain circumstances it contains a space or a character not allowed in a name but the rules are hard to remember. in xml attribute values must always be quoted happiness type joy in html there is a built-in set of element names along with their attributes in xml there are no built-in names although names starting with xml have special meanings in html there is a list of some built-in character names like eacute for but xml does not have this. in xml there are only five built-in character entities lt gt amp quot and apos for and respectively. you can define your own entities in a document type definition or you can use any unicode character see next item in html there are also numeric character references such as 38 for you can refer to any unicode character but the number is decimal whereas in the unicode tables the number is usually in hexadecimal. xml also allows hexadecimal references x26 for example. xml has a number of advantages over many other formats. for any particular scenario you might be able to come up with a better format but then you would have to include costs of converting and processing your format and of training and of the xml-specific editing and searching tool that are now very widely available. some of the advantages of xml include redundancy xml markup is very verbose. for example every end tag must be supplied such as description in the example. this lets the computer catch common errors such as incorrect nesting. self-describing the readability of xml it is a text-based format and the presence of element and attribute names in xml means that people looking at an xml document can often get a head start on understanding the format and it also helps people to find mistakes network effect and the xml promise any xml document can be read and processed by any xml tool whatsoever. of course some xml tools might want specific xml markup but the xml format itself can be read by any xml parser you can t say this xml document is only to be processed by such-and-such a tool. this means that every new xml document increases the value of every other xml document and of every xml tool and every new xml tool increases the value of every xml document and hence of every other tool. today xml is the most widely-used format of its kind anywhere in the world. examples xml is very widely used today. it is the basis of a great many standards such as the universal business language ubl of universal plug and play upnp used for home electronics word processing formats such as odf and ooxml graphics formats such as svg it is used for communication with xmlrpc and web services it is supported directly by computer programming languages and databases from giant servers all the way down to mobile telephones. if you double-click an icon on your computer desktop the icon may well have been drawn with svg chances are that an xml message is sent from one component of the desktop to another. if you take your car to be repaired the engine s computer sends xml to the mechanic s diagnostic systems. it is the age of xml it is everywhere. learn more there are too many xml tutorials to list here. in most cases people using xml for a specific purpose will have written a tutorial. the xml specification itself is approximately 30 pages long and is aimed at computer programmers and information specialists. recent press 13 june laboratory equipment tech lets you track your data online 26 march digital journal the apache software foundation celebrates document freedom day 2014 current status of specifications learn more about the current status of specifications related to xml xml canonicalization efficient xml interchange xml-binary optimized packaging internationalization of xml xml relationship to other formats these w3c groups are working on the related specifications efficient xml interchange working group internationalization working group technical architecture group xml core working group xml processing model working group xml security working group contact liam r. e. quin liam@w3.org current status xml xml canonicalization efficient xml interchange xml-binary optimized packaging internationalization of xml xml relationship to other formats use it tutorials business case software logos xml footer navigation navigation home standards participate membership about w3c contact w3c contact help and faq sponsor donate site map feedback w3c updates copyright 2010 w3c mit ercim keio beihang usage policies apply. 